
Skip to main content
Upload
Sign up | Log in
Books
Video
Audio
Software
Images

    Sign up for free
    Log in

Search metadata
Search text contents
Search TV news captions
Search radio transcripts
Search archived web sites
Advanced Search

    About Blog Projects Help Donate 

    Contact Jobs Volunteer People 

Full text of "Widsith, a study in Old English heroic legend"
See other formats

:00 

=co 

=  CO 
•CM 

loo 


CO 


WIDSITH 


CAMBRIDGE   UNIVERSITY   PRESS 

Eonion:   FETTER  LANE,  E.G. 

C.  F.  CLAY,  MANAGER 


Ototnburgfj:    too,  PRINCES  STREET 

Berlin:   A,  ASHER  AND  CO. 

Irfpjtfl:    F.  A.  BROCKHAUS 
$eto  Hork:   G.  P.  PUTNAM'S  SONS 
an»  (ZTatcutta:   MACMILLAN  AND  CO.,  LTD. 


All  rights  reserved 


WIDSITH 


A   STUDY   IN   OLD   ENGLISH 
HEROIC    LEGEND 


BY 


trt^  - 
R.   W.   CHAMBERS,   M.A. 

FELLOW   AND   LIBRARIAN   OF   UNIVERSITY   COLLEGE,    LONDON 


Cambridge  : 

at  the  University  Press 

1912 


1792 

Cs 


Cambrtfige: 

PRINTED  BY  JOHN  CLAY,   M.A. 
AT  THE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS 


TO 

W.   P.   KER 


PREFACE 

increasing  interest  shown  during  the  last  thirty  years 
J-  in  Beowulf  has,  in  England  at  least,  not  been  extended 
to  the  other  monuments  of  Old  English  heroic  poetry :  and  that 
poetry  has  often,  in  consequence,  been  somewhat  misjudged. 
The  chief  merit  of  Widsith  is  that  it  enables  us  to  make  a  more 
correct  estimate. 

If  Widsith  had  been,  as  some  have  thought  it,  an  authentic 
record  of  a  visit  to  the  court  of  Ermanaric,  it  would  have  been 
valuable :  though  hardly  so  valuable  as  the  account  left  by 
Priscus  of  his  visit  to  the  court  of  Attila,  an  account  which 
nevertheless  few  trouble  to  read.  But  Widsith  is  more  to  us 
than  any  record  of  fourth  or  fifth  century  travel  could  have 
been :  it  is  a  record  of  lost  heroic  song.  As  one  of  its  earliest 
editors  said,  with  sound  sense,  if  in  questionable  Latin,  Discimus 
ex  eo,  quot  carmina  temporum  injurid  nos  amisimus. 

Another  advantage  to  be  drawn  from  a  study  of  Widsith  is 
that  here  we  find  the  older  scholars  at  their  best.  It  is  remark 
able,  considering  the  means  at  his  disposal,  how  good  are  the 
comments  even  of  the  despised  Conybeare,  and  still  more  is 
this  true  of  those  of  Kemble,  Leo,  Lappenberg,  Ettmiiller,  and 
in  more  recent  days,  of  Moller,  Ten  Brink,  and  Miillenhoff. 
I  hope  that  I  have  shown,  both  in  dealing  with  the  Harlung 
story  and  the  Offa  story,  that  my  reverence  for  Miillenhoff  is 
not  a  superstitious  one.  But  it  is  time  to  protest  against  the 
undue  depreciation  of  that  great  scholar,  which  has  of  late  been 
prevalent,  particularly  in  England  and  America.  This  deprecia 
tion  is  often  not  according  to  knowledge :  indeed,  we  find  later 


viii  Preface 

students,  even  the  most  scholarly,  either  ignorant  of  facts  which 
were  perfectly  familiar  to  Kemble  and  Miillenhoff,  or  else  hailing 
such  facts  as  new  discoveries. 

Among  the  more  recent  students,  I  have  to  acknowledge 
indebtedness  most  frequently  to  Binz,  Brandl,  Bremer,  Chad- 
wick,  Heusler,  Holthausen,  Heinzel,  Jiriczek,  Lawrence,  Much, 
Olrik,  Panzer,  Symons.  I  have  tried  to  express  these  and  other 
obligations  in  the  due  place.  Where  there  was  general  agree 
ment  on  any  point,  I  have  been  able  to  pass  over  it  the  more 
rapidly  :  where  I  had  to  differ  from  an  opinion  which  has  heavy 
critical  authority  behind  it,  I  have  felt  bound  to  give  my  reasons 
at  the  greatest  length  space  would  permit.  I  regret  that  this 
tends  to  concentrate  attention  unduly  upon  points  of  difference. 

The  more  the  "  literature  of  the  subject "  is  studied,  the  less 
room  does  there  seem  to  be  for  new  views ;  over  and  over  again 
I  have  discovered  that  some  observation  which  I  was  hoping  to 
find  new  had  been  anticipated — by  Brandl,  Panzer,  Olrik, 
Heinzel,  or  Rajna.  But  instances  probably  remain  in  which 
a  view  which  has  already  been  expressed  by  someone  else  is 
put  forward  as  my  own.  I  cannot  hope  to  have  run  to  earth 
every  discussion  of  every  hero  or  tribe  recorded  in  Widsith. 

And  indeed,  much  has  been  published,  especially  during  the 
past  fifteen  years,  and  in  journals  of  high  repute,  which  it  is 
hardly  necessary  to  put  on  record.  I  have  therefore  reserved 
the  right  of  omitting  references  to  comments  which  did  not 
appear  to  lead  us  further :  other  omissions  are  no  doubt  the 
result  of  oversight.  For  the  same  reason,  in  the  section  on 
grammatical  forms  I  have  neglected  spellings  like  Moidum 
for  Medum  (cf.  Oiddi :  Eddi)  or  Amothingum  (th  for  ]?)  which, 
though  interesting,  could  hardly  be  made  the  basis  or  support 
of  any  argument :  and,  in  dealing  with  the  metrical  effect  of  the 
syncope  of  u,  I  have  neglected  lines  like  On  }>am  sieoc  hund  wees, 
where  the  loss  of  an  earlier  u  might  easily  have  been  concealed 
by  a  slight  rearrangement  of  the  words. 

Finally  I  have  the  pleasure  of  acknowledging  the  help  in 
reading  proofs  very  kindly  given  by  Miss  M.  Eyre,  Miss  E.  V. 


Preface  ix 

Hitchcock,  Mr  L.  A.  Magnus,  and,  I  should  add,  by  the 
Cambridge  Press  reader.  To  Mr  J.  H.  G.  Grattan  I  am  in 
debted  for  many  corrections  and  suggestions,  and  to  Professor 
Robert  Priebsch  for  a  constant  advice  which  has  been  every 
where  of  service,  but  more  particularly  in  the  sections  dealing 
with  Ermanaric,  Hama,  and  Heoden ;  to  Professor  W.  P.  Ker 
my  debt  is  even  heavier,  and  more  difficult  to  define ;  it  will  be 
found,  like  the  blow  which  Offa  gave  his  adversary,  non  unam 
partem  sed  totam  transegisse  compagem. 

R.  W.  CHAMBERS. 


31  December  1911. 


CONTENTS 

CHAP.  PAGE 

I.  WlDBITH  AND  THE  GERMAN  HEROIC  AGE      ....  1 

II.  THE  STORIES  KNOWN  TO  WwsiTB:  GOTHIC  AND  BDRGUNDIAN 

HEROES 12 

III.  THE  STORIES  KNOWN  TO  WlDSITH:  TALES  OF  THE  SEA-FOLK, 

OF  THE  FRANKS  AND  OF  THE  LOMBARDS      ...  66 

IV.  WlDSITH  AND  THE  CRITICS 127 

V.  THE  GEOGRAPHY  OF  WJDSITH 153 

VI.  THE  LANGUAGE  AND  METRE  OF  WIDSITH    .       .       .       .166 

VII.  SUMMARY  AND  CONCLUSION 177 

TEXT  OF  WIDSITB,  WITH  NOTES 187 

APPENDIX  : 

(A)  Bibliography .        .225 

(B)  "  Maurungani"  and  the  "  Geographer  of  Ravenna  "  235 

(C)  Eastgota 236 

(D)  The  Jutes 237 

(E)  The  original  homes    of   the   Angli   and   Varini 

(Engle  and  Wsernas) 241 

(F)  Iste 248 

(G)  Idumingas .        .  250 

(H)    The  term  Hrcedas  applied  to  the  Goths      .        .  252 

(I)      Ermanaric  as  the  foe  of  the  Huns       .        .        .  253 

(K)    The  last  English  allusion  to  Wudga  and  Hama  254 
(L)     The  Geography  of  the  Orosius  compared  with  that 

of  Widsith 254 

(M)    Schiitte's  Law  of  initial  and  terminal  stress       .  255 

(N)    The  beag  given  by  Eormanric      ....  256 

MAPS  AND  INDEX  .                        ...                .  258 


CORRECTIONS  AND   ADDITIONAL  NOTES 

p.  7.  For  a  parallel  to  the  '  Biblical  interpolation  '  in  Widsith  see  Matthew 
Arnold  '  On  the  study  of  Celtic  Literature,'  p.  69  (1867  edit.). 

p.  25.    For  '  common  grandfather  Hrethel '  read  '  kinsman  Hrethel. ' 

p.  172.  The  assertion  that  1.  45  a,  if  we  substitute  for  Hrof&gar  the  earlier 
Hroftgaru,  can  still  be  paralleled  in  Beowulf,  needs  qualification.  For  in  half- 
lines  like  sellice  sadracan,  fyrdsearu  fuslicu,  the  syllable  lie  should  probably  be 
read  short  (cf.  Sievers,  P.B.B.  x,  504;  xxix,  568).  Yet,  for  the  other  reasons 
given  on  p.  172, 1  do  not  think  that  Hroftgaru  is  impossible :  and  even  if  it  were, 
there  are  three  reasons,  any  one  of  which  would  prevent  our  basing  upon  this 
line  an  argument  for  dating  the  bulk  of  Widsith  later  than  700  A.D.  For,  firstly, 
11.  45  etc.  are  presumably  a  subsequent  addition  to  the  Catalogue  of  Kings  (see 
pp.  135,  147) :  secondly,  a  simple  rearrangement  of  the  words  would  make  the 
line  run  satisfactorily :  and  thirdly,  after  a  long  syllable,  bearing  the  subsidiary 
accent,  u  was  lost  earlier  than  after  a  long  syllable  bearing  the  main  accent,  and 
was  certainly  already  lost  before  700. 


CHAPTER  I. 

WIDSITH  AND  THE  GERMAN  HEROIC  AGE. 

The  Heroic  Poetry  of  the  Germans. 

OVER  many  great  races  an  enthusiastic  movement  seems  at 
a  certain  period  to  sweep,  carrying  them  during  a  few  years  to 
success,  alike  in  arms  and  song,  till  the-  stream  sinks  back  into 
its  old  channel,  and  the  nation  continues  a  career,  honourable, 
it  may  be,  but  wanting  in  the  peculiar  ardour  of  its  great  age. 
Such  a  spirit  as  came  upon  the  Athens  of  Pericles,  or  the 
England  of  Elizabeth,  seems  to  have  animated  the  widely 
scattered  Germanic  tribes  which,  in  the  fifth  and  sixth  centuries, 
plundered  and  drank  and  sang  amid  the  ruins  of  imperial 
Rome. 

To  the  cultured  Roman  provincial,  trying  to  lead  an  elegant 
and  lettered  existence  amid  reminiscences  of  the  great  ages  of 
Classical  history,  the  drinking  seemed  immoderate,  and  the  song 
dissonant.  One  such  has  told  us  how  his  soul  was  vexed  at  the 
barbarous  songs  of  his  long-haired  Burgundian  neighbours,  how 
he  had  to  suppress  his  disgust,  and  praise  these  German  lays, 
though  with  a  wry  face.  How  gladly  now  would  we  give  all 
his  verses  for  ten  lines  of  the  songs  in  which  these  "  long-haired, 
seven  foot  high,  onion-eating  barbarians  "  celebrated,  it  may  be, 
the  open-handed  ness  of  Gibica,  or  perhaps  told  how,  in  that 
last  terrible  battle,  their  fathers  had  fallen  fighting  around 
o.  1 


2  Widsith 

Gundahari1.  But  the  Roman,  far  from  caring  to  record  these 
things,  was  anxious  to  shut  his  ears  to  them.  The  orthodox 
bishop  of  the  fifth  century,  when  compelled  to  listen  to  the 
songs  of  German  tribesmen,  seems  to  agree  with  the  apostate 
emperor  of  the  fourth,  who  thought  these  lays  like  the  croaking 
of  harsh-voiced  birds2.  So  it  has  come  to  pass  that,  whilst 
the  contemporary  Latin  verse  has  been  only  too  abundantly 
preserved,  the  songs  chanted  at  the  feasts  of  Gothic  and 
Burgundian,  Frankish  and  Lombard,  Danish  and  Anglian 
chiefs,  in  the  fifth  and  sixth  centuries,  have  been  lost.  The 
loss  is  among  the  most  lamentable  in  the  history  of  poetry. 
Yet  a  few  records  have  come  down  to  us,  for,  as  during 
centuries  these  songs  passed,  in  the  mouths  of  minstrels,  from 
one  branch  to  another  of  the  Teutonic  race8,  they  often  came  to 
be  written  down.  In  later  days  Charles  the  Great  caused  the 
Frankish  versions  to  be  collected4.  Upon  the  English  poems 
Alfred  the  Great  was  educated5 :  upon  them  in  turn  he 
educated  his  children6;  and  he  was  wont  to  recommend  to 
others  the  learning  of  "  Saxon  "  lays  by  heart7.  In  this  case, 
too,  our  authority  makes  mention  of  written  books.  It  is 

1  Quid  me,  etsi  valeam,  parare  carmen 
Fescenninicolffi  jubes  Diones 

inter  crinigeras  situm  catervas 
et  Germanica  verba  sustinentem, 
laudantem  tetrico  subinde  vultu 
quod  Burgundio  cantat  esculentus, 
infundens  acido  comam  butyro? 
vis  dicam  tibi  quid  poema  frangat? 
ex  hoc  barbaricis  abacta  plectris 
spernit  senipedem  stilum  Thalia 
ex  quo  septipedes  videt  patronos,  &c. 

Sidonius  Apollinaris,  Car.  xn,  ed.  Luetjohann, 
p.  231  (in  M.G.H.). 

2  £0ea(r<i/J.T)v  roi  KO.I  TOVS  virtp  rbv  'Prjvov  Papfidpovs  dypia  fi^Xrj  \££et.  ireiroiyfdva, 
irapair\7]<Ttq.  rols  Kptajfj-ois  TWV  rpa\v  ftoibvrwv  6pvL6iav  frSovTas  ical  eti<f>paivofi,frovs  4irl 
rois  fj^\effiv.     (MiffOTTuyuv :  Julian,  ed.  Hertlein,  1875-6,  p.  434.) 

3  There  is  some  evidence  that  not  merely  traditions,  but  complete  lays 
passed  from  one  Germanic  nation  to  another.    (Cf.  Heusler,  L.u.E.  4 ;  Symons 
in  Z.f.d.Ph.  xxxvm,  164.) 

*  Einhard,  Vita  Carol,  c.  29.     In  Pertz  (fol.)  SS.  n,  458. 

5  Asser,  ed  Stevenson,  1904,  §  22  Sed  Saxonica  poemata  die  noctuque  solers 
auditor,  relatu  aliorum  saepissime audiens,  docibilis  memoriterretinebat...23  Cum 
ergo  quodam  die  mater  sua...quendam  Saxonicum  poematicae  artis  librum... 
ostenderet... 

6  §  75  Eadwerd  et  j33lfthryth...et  psalmos  et  Saxonicos  libros  et  maxime 
Saxonica  carmina  studiose  didicere. 

7  §  76  Interea  tamen  rex...et  Saxonicos  libros  recitare,  et  maxime  carmina 
Saxonica  memoriter  discere  aliis  imperare , , .non  desinebat. 


Widsith  and  the  German  heroic  age  3 

likely,  however,  that,  more  often  than  not,  these  Germanic  lays 
were  not  committed  to  writing  at  all.  Of  those  that  were, 
England  has  preserved  a  few,  fragmentary  but  most  precious, 
and  continental  Germany  one. 

Yet  we  can  form  but  a  poor  idea  of  this  old  literature  from 
the  surviving  fragments  of  the  Songs  of  Waldere  or  Hildebrand, 
still  less  from  Beoiuulf,  the  one  poem  which  happens  to  have 
come  down  to  us  complete,  but  of  which  the  plot  is  singularly 
poor.  A  better  estimate  of  the  value  of  these  vanished  songs 
can  be  made,  partly  from  certain  passages  in  the  Latin 
chroniclers  which  are  obviously  founded  upon  lost  lays,  partly 
from  the  magnificent  afterglow  of  the  Old  Norse  heroic  verse 
and  prose  saga;  and  not  least  from  the  glamour  which  an 
English  poet,  using  the  old  motives  and  the  old  common 
places,  has  been  able  to  throw  over  the  historic  facts  of  the 
death,  in  battle  against  the  heathen,  of  an  Essex  nobleman  in 
the  days  of  Ethelred  the  Unready. 

So  this  world  of  high-spirited,  chivalrous  song  has  passed 
away,  leaving  fragments  so  scanty  that  it  requires  some  sym 
pathetic  allowance  before  we  can  realise  how  great  the  loss  has 
been : 

hu  seo  >rag  gewat 
genap  under  nihthelm,  swa  heo  no  waere ! 

We  cannot  accept  as  compensation  the  remodelled  stories  in 
the  thirteenth  century  High  German  garb  in  which  they  have 
come  down  to  us.  Sifrit,  the  horny-skinned  wife-beater,  Gunther 
hanging  from  a  peg  in  his  bedchamber1,  are  but  poor  substitutes 
for  the  lost  figures  of  the  old  Teutonic  hero-song,  Gundahari 
the  Burgundian,  Offa  the  Angle,  Ermanaric  the  tyrant  or  the 
noble  Theodoric.  The  Nibelungen  Lied  is  beyond  dispute  one 
of  the  world's  greatest  things.  Inferior  as  it  is  in  detail  to  the 
Greek  epic,  yet,  when  all  is  drawing  to  an  end,  and  the  terrible 
Hagene  has  been  overcome  by  the  perfect  knight,  Dietrich  von 
Bern,  we  are  left  with  a  deep  awe  akin  to  what  we  feel  when 
we  see  Priam  at  the  knees  of  Achilles.  The  Nibelungen  Lied 
is  glorious,  but  its  glory,  like  its  metre,  is  not  that  of  the 
ancient  lays. 

1  ,Der  Nibelunge  Not  (Lachmann,  590*,  837* ;  Bartsph,  640,  894). 

1—2 


4  Widsith 

It  is  our  duty  then  to  gather  up  reverently  such  fragments 
of  the  old  Teutonic  epic  as  fortune  has  preserved  in  our  English 
tongue,  and  to  learn  from  them  all  we  can  of  that  collection 
of  stories  of  which  these  fragments  are  the  earliest  vernacular 
record 

Widsith. 

The  weightiest  vernacular  document  bearing  upon  the  old 
German  hero-cycles  is  a  poem  found  in  the  Exeter  Book,  that 
collection  of  English  religious  verse,  transcribed  in  the  late 
tenth  or  early  eleventh  century,  which  was  given  to  his  cathedral 
church  by  Leofric,  first  Bishop  of  Exeter  (died  1072). 

Widsith  and  Deor,  which  stand  respectively  eleventh  and 
twentieth  in  the  collection,  differ  remarkably  from  the  other 
poems  in  the  volume.  They  are  relics  of  heathendom  embedded 
in  a  Christian  anthology.  Both  are  lyrics  founded  upon  epic 
tradition :  in  each  a  glee  man  tells  a  tale  of  himself,  adorning 
his  song  by  copious  allusions  to  the  stories  he  loves. 

Widsith — "Farway" — the  ideal  wandering  minstrel,  tells  of 
all  the  tribes  among  which  he  has  sojourned,  all  the  chieftains 
he  has  known.  The  first  English  students1  of  the  poem  re 
garded  it  as  autobiographical,  as  the  actual  record  of  his 
wanderings  written  by  a  real  scdp',  and  were  inclined  to 
dismiss  as  interpolations  passages  mentioning  princes  whom 
it  was  chronologically  impossible  for  a  man  who  had  met 
Ermanaric  to  have  known.  This  view  was  reduced  to  an 
absurdity  by  Haigh,  who  pointed  out  that  a  certain  hero, 
Hama,  is  mentioned  last.  But  what  reason  can  have  led  to 
his  being  mentioned  last  ?  Clearly  only  one ;  the  Traveller 

1  For  example :  Conybeare,  Illustrations,  1826,  p.  28 :  Kemble,  Preface  to 
Beowulf,  1833,  p.  xvii :  Guest,  Rhythms,  1838,  vol.  n,  pp.  76,  etc. 

Stopford  Brooke  (English  Literature  from  the  beginning  to  the  Norman 
Conquest,  1898,  pp.  46-8)  and  Garnett  (English  Literature,  i,  pp.  7-8)  have, 
more  recently,  been  inclined  to  regard  the  poem  in  this  light,  though  with 
considerable  hesitation;  and  so,  with  perhaps  less  hesitation,  have  Anderson 
(pp.  5,  23)  and  Chadwick  (Camb.  Hist,  i,  36). 

Brandl,  too,  speaks  of  Widsith  as  autobiographical  (Berl.  Sitzungsberichte, 
xxxv,  1908);  a  view  which  is  disputed  by  Schiicking  (Engl.  Stud.  XLII,  111). 
But  I  take  Brandl  to  mean  merely  that  Widsith  is  cast  in  an  autobiographical 
form,  not  that  the  travels  narrated  are  historic;  this  last  view  would  not  be 
consistent  with  what  Brandl  has  said  elsewhere  about  Widsith  (Pauls  Grdr.  M 
n,  1,  968). 


Widsith  and  the  German  heroic  age  5 

himself,  Haigh  urged,  was  Hama,  and  was  moved  by  motives  of 
modesty  \ 

The  temptation  to  attribute  historic  value  to  poetry  in 
which  the  names  of  historic  chiefs  often  meet  us  is,  of  course, 
strong;  and,  giving  way  to  it,  the  early  chroniclers  of  many 
nations  have  incorporated  heroic  tradition  into  their  histories. 
But  it  is  an  essential  characteristic  of  heroic  poetry  that,  whilst 
it  preserves  many  historic  names,  it  gives  the  story  modified 
almost  past  recognition  by  generations  of  poetic  tradition. 
Accurate  chronology  too  is,  in  the  absence  of  written  records,  ; 
impossible :  all  the  great  historic  chieftains  become  con-  ; 
temporaries :  their  deeds  are  confused  :  only  their  names,  and 
sometimes  their  characters,  remain. 

The  more  we  study  the  growth  of  German  heroic  tradition, 
the  more  clear  does  it  become  that  Widsith  and  Deor  reflect 
that  tradition.  They  are  not  the  outpourings  of  actual  poets 
at  the  court  of  Ermanaric  or  the  Heodenings.  What  the  poems 
sung  in  the  hall  of  Ermanaric  were  like  we  shall  never  know : 
but  we  can  safely  say  that  they  were  unlike  Widsith.  The  mere 
excision  of  a  name  here  and  there  will  not  put  our  poem  back 
to  the  date  of  Ermanaric,  any  more  than  the  excision  of  a  few 
late  features  will  make  Mallory's  Morte  d'Arthur  a  correct 
account  of  the  court  of  a  sixth  century  British  king2. 

The  reasons  which  prevent  us  from  regarding  Widsith  as  the 
itinerary  of  a  real  scop  have  been  stated  fully  and  convincingly 
by  a  recent  critic8.  To  suppose  that  the  author,  in  his  own 
person,  claims  to  have  come  into  contact  with  Ermanaric  is 
indeed  to  misunderstand  the  spirit  of  the  poem.  The  Traveller's 
tale  is  a  phantasy  of  some  man,  keenly  interested  in  the  old 

1  Haigh,  Sagas,  p.  148. 

2  I  cannot  agree  with  Mr  Chadwick's  attempt  to  draw  historic  and  even 
chronological  data  from  Widsith.    See  Origin  of  the  English  Nation,  135.    How 
limited  is  the  historic  element  in  German  heroic  tradition  has  been  well  shown 
by  Heusler,  Berl.  Sitzungsberichte,  xxxvn,  1909. 

3  Lawrence  in  Mod.  Philol.  rv,  355,  etc.,  367,  etc.   The  careful  and  measured 
statement  of  Dr  Lawrence  appears  to  me  to  be  conclusive.    But  the  view  that 
the  Traveller's  wanderings  are  at  least  in  part  historic  is  still  so  prevalent 
among  English  scholars  that  I  have  thought  it  better  to  summarize  below  the 
considerations  which,  as  it  appears  to  me,  make  it  impossible  so  to  regard 
them,   from   an  investigation  first   of  heroic  legend  (pp.  142-3)  and  then  of 
geography  (pp.  163-5). 


6  Widsith 

stories,  who  depicts  an  ideal  wandering  singer,  and  makes  him 
move  hither  and  thither  among  the  tribes  and  the  heroes  whose 
stories  he  loves.  In  the  names  of  its  chiefs,  in  the  names  of  its 
tribes,  but  above  all  in  its  spirit,  Widsith  reflects  the  heroic  age 
of  the  migrations,  an  age  which  had  hardly  begun  in  the  days 
/  of  Ermanaric. 

Catalogues  of  this  kind  are  peculiarly  liable  to  interpolation, 
especially  during  a  period  of  oral  tradition.  There  is  a  natural 
tendency  for  each  gleeman  through  whose  hands  the  poem 
passes  to  corrupt  the  names  of  clans  and  heroes  with  which 
he  is  not  familiar,  and  to  add  the  names  of  others  which  his 
tribal  prejudices  lead  him  to  think  should  not  have  been  left 
without  honourable  mention.  Hence  catalogues,  from  those  in 
the  second  book  of  the  Iliad  or  the  eleventh  book  of  the 
Odyssey  downwards,  are  always  to  be  suspected1. 

But  in  Widsith  we  have  a  catalogue  of  some  seventy  tribes2 ; 
and  of  sixty-nine  heroes,  many  of  whom  can  be  proved  to  have 
existed  in  the  third,  fourth  and  fifth  centuries  of  our  era,  and 
the  latest  of  whom  belong  to  the  sixth  century.  Yet,  although 
every  chief  whom  we  can  date  lived  prior,  not  only  to  the  con 
version  of  the  English  to  Christianity,  but  even  to  the  com 
pletion  of  their  settlement  in  Britain,  this  thoroughly  heathen 
poem  has  come  down  to  us  in  a  transcript  which  some  English 
monk  made  about  the  year  1000.  Clearly  it  will  require 
patience  to  disentangle  its  history,  and  fix  its  approximate 
date  and  place  of  origin. 

1  A  comparison   of  Widsith  with   the   Greek  heroic   catalogues  would   be 
helpful:  it  has  been  indicated,  without  details,  by  Meyer  (Altgermanische  Poesie, 
1889,  p.  4).     We  might  also  compare  later  mediaeval  lists  of  romances  such  as 
those  given  in  Skelton's  Philip  Sparrow,  those  quoted  in  the  appendix  to  Ker's 
Epic  and  Romance,  or  those  Italian  catalogues  printed  by  Pio  Eajna  (Zeitschrift 
/.  Romanifche  Philologie,  n,  1878,  pp.  138  etc.,  222  etc.).    The  likeness  of  these 
latter  to  Widsith  was  noted  by  Eajna  himself  (Origini,  p.  40).    But  the  closest 
parallel  of  all  is  found  in  the  Icelandic  name  lists,  as  given  in  the  heroic  muster 
rolls,  in  the  Thulor,  and  in  poems  like  Grimnismdl,  Hyndloljfy,  the  opening 
lines  of  the  Angantyr  lay  (cf.  C.P.B.  i,  565),  or  the  enumeration  of  dwarfs  in 
Volospd.    For  later   Icelandic  lists   see  Kolbing,  Beitrdge  zur  vergleichenden 
Geschichte  der  romantischen  Poesie,  1876,  pp.  154-5,  and  C.P.B.  i,  pp.  xviii,  cxi. 

2  Including  twenty-two  referred  to  only  in  the  doubtful  passage. 


Widsith  and  the  German  heroic  age 


General  Impressions  of  the  Poem.     Obvious  Interpolations. 
Age  of  the  subject-matter. 

Whilst  the  general  consensus  of  opinion  would  make  our 
poem  one  of  the  oldest,  if  not  quite  the  oldest,  in  Germanic 
literature,  one  critic  of  repute  has,  on  the  strength  of  certain 
Biblical  and  Oriental  names  occurring  in  it,  placed  it  as  late  as 
the  early  ninth  century1. 

Such  a  view  has,  however,  been  justly  condemned  by 
Miillenhoff  as  superficial2.  It  neglects  the  fact,  so  obvious 
even  to  a  casual  observer,  that  these  Biblical  and  Oriental 
names  are  confined  to  one  brief  passage,  and  are  alien  to  the 
spirit  of  the  poem  as  a  whole.  The  author  was  clearly  a  man 
steeped  in  all  the  lore  of  the  Teutonic  races  :  he  makes  his 
Widsith  visit  Swedes  and  Burgundians,  Angles  and  Danes, 
Lombards  and  Goths :  he  is  interested  in  the  national  heroes 
of  all  these  folk  :  he  knows  something  too  of  the  peoples  across 
the  mark :  Widsith  has  visited  the  Finns  of  the  North  and  the 
Wends  of  the  East,  has  heard  tell  of  the  Caesar  of  the  East 
and  has  been  in  Italy.  He  is  skilled  in  traditional  and 
genealogical  lore,  in  those  "old  unhappy  far  off  things  and 
battles  long  ago "  which  are  so  highly  rated  in  the  heroic  age 
of  any  people.  But  we  may  safely  say  of  the  poet  that  his 
study  was  but  little  on  the  Bible.  The  student  who  reads 
Widsith  for  the  first  time  passes  therefore,  with  a  feeling  of 
surprise,  from  a  list  of  tribes  with  whose  stories  any  gleeman 
of  the  heroic  age  would  be  familiar,  to  a  series  of  supposititious 
travels  among  Medes  and  Persians,  Israelites  and  Hebrews. 
Accordingly  this  passage  was,  at  a  very  early  stage  in  the 
criticism  of  Widsith,  condemned  as  spurious3;  and  for  a  critic, 

1  K.  Maurer  in  Zacher's  Z.f.d.Ph.  n  (1870),  447. 

2  D.A.  v,  65-6. 

3  By  Kemble.  "  More  than  one  circumstance,  however,  compels  us  to  con 
clude  that  later  transcribers  added  to  the  work  of  Hermanaric's  contemporary. 
Not  only  is  the  insertion  of  several  nations  only  known  in  Europe  through  the 
Bible,  and  the  distinction  between  Hebrews  and  Israelites  suspicious,  but  the 
mention  of  Theodoric  the  king   of  the  Franks,  if  by  this  prince  the  son  of 
Chlodowic   be  meant,  places   the  poem  in  which  his  name  occurs   later  at 
least  than  A.D.  480."    Preface  to  Beowulf,  1833,  p.  xvii.    Leo,  Sprachproben,  82, 
endorsed  this  view. 


8  Wtdnth 

in  trying  to  fix  the  date  of  the  poem,  to  overlook  its  doubtful 
nature  and  to  base  his  theories  upon  it,  is,  as  Miillenhoff  has 
stated,  uncritical. 

It  is  true  that  the  certainty  with  which  a  German  scholar 
will  sometimes  fix  upon  this  or  that  passage  as  interpolated  is 
apt  to  arouse  scepticism  in  English  students1.  But  here  the 
evidence  is  peculiarly  strong,  and  we  are  compelled  to  endorse 
the  judgment  of  Miillenhoff,  that  a  critic  will  hardly  recognise 
any  passage  as  interpolated,  if  he  does  not  so  recognise  this2. 

Exactly  how  long  is  the  interpolated  passage,  it  is  more 
difficult  to  say.  The  four  lines  of  Oriental  adventure  (75,  82-4) 
must  certainly  go : 

Mid  Sercingum  ic  waes  and  mid  Seringum,  ... 

Mid  Israhelum  ic  wees  and  mid  Exsyringum, 

Mid  Ebreum  and  mid  Indeum  and  mid  Egyptum. 

Mid  Moid  urn  ic  waes  and  mid  Persum,  and  mid  Myrgingum. 

Miillenhoff  is  perhaps  right  in  condemning  the  whole  thirteen 
lines,  75 — 87,  and  in  including  in  the  same  condemnation  lines 
14 — 17  (Alexandreas)  and  lines  131 — 134.  Our  judgment  must 
depend  upon  our  interpretation  of  certain  puzzling  individual 
words.  As  an  example  of  this,  line  87  may  be  taken, 
And  mid  Eolum  and  mid  Istum  and  Idumingum. 

What  tribe  can  be  signified  under  the  name  Eolum  is  unknown; 
and  if  we  are  to  attach  any  meaning  to  the  word,  we  must  alter 
the  text.  Istum  in  all  probability  refers  to  the  Esths,  whatever 
race  may  have  been  designated  by  that  name,  but  our  judgment 
of  the  verse  must  depend  upon  the  interpretation  of  Idumingum. 
If  these  are  the  Idumaeans  of  the  Bible,  then  the  verse  must 
be  attributed  to  our  late  monkish  interpolator.  But  it  is  at 
least  possible  that  we  have  here  a  record  of  a  Baltic  tribe, 
neighbours  and  near  of  kin  to  the  Esths,  the  Ydumaei,  whose 
unruly  doings  are  recorded  by  a  Livonian  chronicler  of  a  later 
period3.  Tf  this  be  so,  we  have  in  the  juxtaposition  of  Esths 
and  Ydumaei  a  piece  of  geographical  information  of  the  kind 
which  the  author  or  authors  of  the  original  poem  would  be 

1  Cf.  Jebb,  Oedipus  Coloneus,  1885,  p.  lii ;  Morley's  English  Writers,  u,  31. 

2  Z.f.d.A.  xi,  291. 

3  See  Appendix  G,  Idumingas. 


Widsith  and  the  German  heroic  age  9 

likely  to  possess,  but  which  would  appear  to  be  quite  beyond 
the  reach  of  the  tenth  century  English  monk  whom  we  suppose 
to  have  interpolated  lines  82 — 84;  and  we  must  in  that  case 
pronounce  the  lines  genuine. 

If,  however,  we  place  on  one  side  the  four  lines  72,  82 — 4 
as  interpolated,  and  the  other  lines  rejected  by  Miillenhoff  as 
suspect,  the  poem  leaves  upon  us  a  very  definite  impression. 
It  is  a  catalogue  of  the  tribes  and  heroes  of  Germany,  and 
many  of  these  heroes,  though  they  may  have  been  half  legendary 
already  to  the  writer  of  the  poem,  are  historic  characters  who 
can  be  dated  with  accuracy.  Widsith  has  been  at  the  court  of 
the  most  powerful  of  all  the  Gothic  kings,  Eormanric,  who 
died  A.D.  375 ;  and  of  Guthhere  (Gundahari)  the  Burgundian, 
who  ruled  at  Worms  from  413  to  437.  He  knows  of  ^Etla 
(Attila),  who  reigned  from  433  to  453,  and  of  the  Frankish 
Theodoric,  who  reigned  from  511  to  534.  He  even  mentions 
being  in  Italy  with  ^Elfwine  (Alboin)  who  invaded  Italy  in  568 
and  died  in  572  or  573 \ 

On  the  other  hand,  scholars  have,  with  few  exceptions, 
assumed  that  no  mention  is  made  of  the  Ostrogothic  Theodoric, 
the  conqueror  of  Italy,  who  reigned  from  474  to  526,  and  whose 
fame  was  to  eclipse  that  of  all  the  chiefs  just  mentioned,  till 
Eormanric  (Ermenrich),  Guthhere  (Gunther),  and  JEtla  (Etzel) 
came  to  be  mere  foils  to  the  heroic  figure  of  the  mirror  of 
knighthood,  Theodoric  of  Verona :  Dietrich  von  Bern. 

The  assumption  that  Dietrich  von  Bern  does  not  appear  in 
Widsith  was  made  too  hastily,  as  can  be  proved  ;  but  certainly 
the  figure  of  the  great  Ostrogothic  king  had  not  yet  assumed 
its  gigantic  proportions  when  our  poem  was  written.  If 
mentioned  at  all,  Theodoric  is  thought  of  as  a  retainer  of 
Eormanric :  later  poets  would  have  thought  of  Eormanric  only 
as  the  uncle  and  foe  of  Theodoric. 

Our  poem  then  reflects  a  definitely  marked  period :  that  of 

those  barbarian  invasions  of  the  Roman  Empire,  which  began 

when  the  Goths  first  swarmed  across  the  frontier,  and  ended 

with  Alboin's  falling  upon  an  Italy  worn  by  famine,  pestilence 

1  See  Hodgkin,  Italy,  v,  168  (footnote). 


10  Widsith 

and  the  sword  of  Visigoth,  Hun,  Vandal  and  Ostrogoth. 
Whether  Widsith  is  to  be  regarded  as  the  work  of  one  man,  or 
as  a  cento  of  several  heroic  catalogues,  need  not  for  the  moment 
trouble  us;  for,  though  the  various  sections  of  the  poem  may 
show  minor  idiosyncrasies,  they  all  reflect  the  same  heroic  age. 
Excluding  the  lines  of  Biblical  lore,  we  are  left  with  a  poem 
recording  the  tribes  and  chiefs  of  the  German  migrations,  from 
the  middle  of  the  third  to  the  middle  of  the  sixth  century: 
from  Ostrogotha  to  Alboin. 

Alboin  gives  us  then  a  limit  to  the  age  of  the  poem  in  its 
present  form.  It  must  be  later  than  568,  not  necessarily  much 
later,  for  we  need  not  scrupulously  allot  a  term  of  years  to 
allow  of  ^Elfwine  receding  into  the  legendary  plane  of  the 
earlier  Eormanric  and  ^Etla:  to  the  far-off  dwellers  on  the 
North  Sea,  both  might  perhaps  soon  seem  equally  distant. 

How  much  later,  we  can  only  guess  after  a  rather  minute 
examination  of  the  stories  of  the  chiefs  and  peoples  recorded  in 
Widsith.  If  we  find  the  poet  constantly  referring  to  a  state 
of  things  which  had  passed  out  of  existence  by  the  seventh 
century,  this,  together  with  his  silence  on  all  matters  later  than 
the  year  568,  will  incline  us  to  regard  the  matter  of  the  poem, 
approximately,  as  belonging  to  the  last  decades  of  the  sixth 
century  or  the  first  of  the  seventh. 

In  the  sixth  century  each  of  the  innumerable  tribes  into 
which  each  of  the  five  great  branches  of  the  German  people 
was  subdivided  was  an  independent  nation,  with  its  own  laws, 
traditions  and  policy ;  and  these  nations  were  scattered  over  all 
Europe  and  part  of  Northern  Africa.  No  man  could  know 
them  all,  and  it  is  quite  easy  to  see  wherein  the  interests  of 
the  poet  of  Widsith  lay.  That  poem  does  not  belie  the  English 
dress  in  which  it  has  come  down  to  us.  It  is  in  the  countries 
bordering  on  the  Baltic  and  the  North  Sea,  be  seem  tweonum,  that 
we  must  locate  the  tales  which  interest  him :  the  stories  of 
Sceaf,  Hagena  and  Heoden,  Finn  Folcwalding,  Offa  the  Angle, 
Breca  of  the  Brondings,  Hrothgar  and  Ingeld. 

But  one  branch  of  the  German  people  had  done  and  suffered 
so  much  that  their  heroes  became  household  names  throughout 


Widsith  and  the  German  heroic  age  11 

all  Germania.  The  Gothic  champions,  Eastgota  and  Eormanric, 
Wudga  and  Hama,  and  the  Huns  who,  first  as  the  enemies, 
then  as  the  allies,  and  again  as  the  enemies  of  the  Goths,  are 
inextricably  entangled  in  their  history  and  saga:  these  are 
as  familiar  to  the  poet  of  Widsith  as  his  own  sea-heroes. 

Widsith  visits  many  people :  but  he  starts  from  amid  the 
sea-folk,  and  his  objective  is  the  Gothic  court.  We  shall  find  it 
easy  to  get  order  out  of  the  apparent  chaos  of  his  tradition  and 
ethnology,  if  we  divide  the  stories  he  loves  into  (1)  Gothic  saga 
and  (2)  the  tales  of  the  sea-folk. 

At  the  outset,  this  is  summed  up  in  seven  words  when  it  is 
said  of  the  minstrel : 

HreScyninges  ham  gesohte, 
eastan  of  Ongle,  Eormanrices. 


NOTE.  When  a  Germanic  hero  is  spoken  of  without 
reference  to  any  particular  version  of  his  story,  I  give  the 
name  in  the  current  historical  form ;  but  when  referring 
particularly  to  any  version,  in  the  form  proper  to  that  version. 
Thus  Ermanaric  is  the  form  generally  used,  Eormanric  and 
Jormunrekk  being  reserved  respectively  for  the  king  of  Old 
English  and  of  Scandinavian  legend.  Similarly  Gundahari  is 
used  for  the  historic  king :  O.E.  Guthhere,  O.N.  Gunnar,  M.H.G. 
Gunther  for  the  hero  of  particular  traditions. 

A  difficulty  arises  in  the  case  of  heroes  who  have  no  known 
historical  prototype.  Here  the  Old  English  name  (e.g.  Hama) 
has  to  be  used  both  generally,  and  also  as  the  specifically 
O.E.  form ;  a  form  like  Heimir  is  left  for  the  champion  as 
depicted  in  the  Thidreks  saga. 

When  Scandinavian  names  are  transliterated  S  is  repre 
sented  by  th,  not  by  d :  v  by  v,  not  by  w.  But  where  a  form 
seems  to  be  definitely  established  with  d  or  w,  it  is  retained  : 
Swanhild,  Swein,  Sigurd,  Thidreks  saga.  The  r  of  the  nomina 
tive  is  kept  after  vowels,  but  not  after  consonants :  Heimir, 
Jormunrekk,  Th ith rek. 


CHAPTEE   II. 

THE  STORIES  KNOWN  TO  WIDSITH:    GOTHIC  AND 
BURGUNDIAN  HEROES. 

The  beginnings  of  Heroic  Song  in  Germany. 

TACITUS1  mentions  the  ancient  songs  in  which  the  Germans 
celebrated  Tuisco,  the  earth-sprung  god,  and  his  son  Mannus, 
the  authors  and  founders  of  their  race.  Whether  these  poems 
were  narrative  or  choric  we  do  not  know.  That  not  gods  alone 
but  also  historical  and  semi-historical  heroes  were  com 
memorated,  is  proved  however  by  the  further  remark  of 
Tacitus  concerning  the  old  poems  "  quod  unum  apud  illos 
memoriae  et  annalium  genus  est."  One  other  precious  scrap 
of  information  Tacitus  has  preserved.  When  making  his  last 
mention  of  Arminius,  and  telling  how  Tiberius  refused  to 
compass  by  poison  the  death  of  the  enemy  of  the  Roman 
people,  he  sums  up  thus  the  further  history  of  the  liberator  of 
Germany:  "dolo  propinquorum  cecidit . . . septem  et  triginta 
annos  vitas,  duodecim  potentia3  explevit,  caniturque  adhuc 
barbaras  apud  gentes*." 

It  is  not  strange  that  this  notice  of  a  chief,  cut  off  in  the 
flower  of  his  age  by  the  treachery  of  those  closest  to  him,  has 
reminded  modern  critics  of  the  story  of  Sigurd  the  Volsung, 
and  that  some  have  seen  in  the  story  of  Sigurd's  death  by  the 
wiles  of  his  sworn  brethren  the  last  traditional  echo  of  this 
treacherous  onslaught  upon  Arminius,  and  of  the  songs  in 
which  his  deeds  and  his  death  were  celebrated.  No  evidence 
however  is  forthcoming  to  support  such  a  theory,  and  there 
is  much  which  tells  directly  against  it. 

1  Germania,  2.  2  Annals,  u,  88. 


Stories  known  to  Widsith:  Gothic  heroes  13 

Not  till  some  three  centuries  later,  and  among  the  Goths, 
do  we  find  the  first  German  heroes  whose  stories  told  in  German 
speech  have  lasted  through  the  ages. 

It  may  even  be  that  the  development  of  epic  poetry,  as 
opposed  to  the  choric  poem  of  a  more  primitive  age,  was  the 
work  of  Gothic  minstrels.  But  there  is  no  proof  of  this. 
Those  critics1  who  would  see  evidence  of  the  preeminence  of  the 
Goths  in  epic  song  in  the  fact  that  Clovis  the  Frank  requested 
the  gift  of  a  harper  from  Theodoric  the  Goth,  as  recorded  in 
the  correspondence  of  Theodoric's  minister,  Cassiodorus2,  have 
overlooked  the  context.  For  in  the  preceding  letter,  a  florid 
effusion  treating  of  the  Lydian  and  Phrygian  measures,  the 
Sirens,  Orpheus,  and  the  Psalms  of  David,  the  selection  of  this 
harper  is  deputed  to  Boethius  the  Patrician.  The  citharoedus 
was,  then,  no  Gothic  minstrel,  but  an  Italian  or  Greek  per 
former  ;  and  the  letter  to  Clovis,  so  far  from  marking  the  first 
spread  of  epic  poetry  from  the  Goths  to  the  Franks,  proves 
nothing  at  all3.  It  is  necessary  to  emphasize  this,  because 
theories  as  to  the  date  of  Widsith  have  been  based  upon  the 
argument  that  the  gleeman's  visit  to  Eormanric  reflects  that 
preeminence  of  the  Gothic  court  in  heroic  song  which  is 
inferred  from  the  letter  to  Clovis4. 


Eastgota. 

But  there  is  no  need  to  exaggerate  the  part  played  by  the 
Goths  in  the  development  of  Germanic  song,  for  in  any  case  it 
is  important  enough. 

Jordanes  mentions  songs  which  dealt  with  the  wanderings 
of  the  Goths  after  they  had  left  their  old  home  on  the  shores  of 
the  Baltic,  and  were  migrating  across  the  steppes  of  Russia  to 

1  e.g.  Koegel,  Ltg.  i,  1,  130.  2  Varice,  n,  40,  41. 

3  Since  writing  this  I  have  noticed  that  it  was  pointed  out  nearly  thirty 
years  ago  by  an  Italian  scholar  (Eajna,  Origini,  p.  36)  and  more  recently  by 
an  English  one  (Chambers,  The  Mediaeval  Stage,  1903,  p.  34)  that  the  letter 
to  Boethius  indicates  that  the  citharoedus  was  sent  to  the  Franks  to  replace 
barbaric  by  civilized  music.     Yet  he  is  still  quoted  as  evidence  for  Germanic 
heroic  song,  even  by  those  who  do  not  accept  the  whole  of  Koegel's  deductions 
(e.g.  Symons  in  Pauls  Grdr.(2)  in,  622;  Chadwick  in  Camb.  Hist.  i.  p.  20). 

4  See  _Bojunga  in  P.B.B.  xvi,  548. 


14  Widsith 

the  Black  Sea1.  It  is  not  however  till  the  third  century,  with 
the  irruption  of  the  Goths  into  the  Roman  Empire,  that  we 
come  to  a  king — Ostrogotha — whose  name  became  part  of  the 
common  stock  of  Germanic  story. 

Towards  the  end  of  Widsith  a  list  is  given  of  chieftains  at 
the  court  of  Eormanric,  king  of  the  Goths.  The  list  is  a  long 
one,  and,  as  we  should  expect,  it  includes  the  names  of  Goths 
of  a  much  earlier  date,  who  have  been  attracted  into  the  circle 
of  the  later  and  greater  king.  Thus,  amongst  Eormanric's 
followers  mention  is  made  of — 

East-Gotan, 
frodne  and  godne,  feeder  Unwenes. 

Eastgota,  far  from  being  a  follower  of  Eormanric,  was 
apparently  his  great-great-grandfather.  But  his  fame  paled 
before  that  of  younger  heroes,  and  his  story  was  forgotten,  amid 
the  exciting  events  which  crowded  one  upon  another  during  the 
centuries  following  his  reign.  He  is  otherwise  unremembered 
in  extant  Germanic  heroic  poetry,  but  some  hint  of  his  story  is 
given  by  Cassiodorus  (c.  480 — 575),  and  by  Jordanes,  whose 
De  Origine  Actibusque  Getarum  (written  between  550  and  552) 
has  preserved  the  substance  of  the  lost  books  of  Cassiodorus,  on 
the  History  of  the  Goths. 

Enituit  enim  Ostrogotha  patientia  wrote  Cassiodorus  in  a 
famous  passage  on  the  characteristics  of  the  kings  of  Gothic 
story2 :  and  this  patience,  followed  in  the  end  by  hard  hitting, 
seems  to  be  the  essential  feature  of  the  story  of  Ostrogotha,  as 
told  by  Jordanes3. 

Stirred  by  the  injustice  of  the  Emperor  Philip  (A.D.  244 — 
249)  who  refuses  to  pay  to  the  Goths  their  due  subsidies, 

1  ad  extremam  Scythice  partem,  que  Ponto  [Pontico]  mari  vicina  eat,  pro- 
perant ;  qitemadmodum  et  in  priscis  eorurn  carminibus  pene  storicu  [historico] 
ritu  in  commune  recolitur.     Getica,  rv,  (28). 

2  Cassiodorus,  Varice,  xi,  1. 

3  Whatever  may  be  the  etymology  of  Ostrogotha  (see  Streitberg  in  I.F.  iv, 
300-9),  it  is  not  disputed  that  at  a  very  early  period  it  was  understood  to  mean 
'  East-Goth.'    For  Hunuil-Unwen  see  note  to  1.  114.     The  equation  of  Eastgota 
and  Ostrogotha  rests  then  upon  the  identity  of  name,  and  the  close  resemblance 
of  the  son's  name.  We  might  also  compare  frod  and  god  with  Cassiodorus'  enituit 
patientia  and  Jordanes'  ut  erat  solidi  animi  (xvn,  99).     The  evidence  for  the 
identification  seems  satisfactory,  and  there  is  nothing  to  be  said  for  the  other 
suggested  interpretations  of  the  name,  as  Angantyr  (Rafn  in  Antiquites  Russes,  i, 
111),  Eckehart  (Heinzel,  Ostgotische  Heldensage,  67)  or  as  "ein  dritter  sonst 
unbekannter  Hereling"  (Boer,  Ermanarich,  67,  79). 


Stories  known  to  Widsith:  Gothic  heroes  15 

Ostrogotha,  king  of  the  united  Gothic  nation,  Ostrogoths  and 
Visigoths  alike,  crosses  the  Danube,  and  wastes  Mcesia  and 
Thrace :  on  the  occasion  of  a  second  invasion  the  Goths  put  the 
town  of  Marcianopolis  to  ransom,  and  return  with  the  plunder 
to  their  land.  Hereupon  the  nation  of  the  Gepidae,  closely 
related  to  the  Goths,  is  moved  to  envy.  The  Gepidae,  and  their 
king  Fastida,  have  been  elated  by  a  recent  victory,  in  which 
they  have  almost  annihilated  the  Burgundians;  they  accordingly 
send  envoys  to  Ostrogotha,  and  demand  that  he  shall  either 
meet  them  in  battle,  or  surrender  to  them  a  portion  of  the 
Gothic  territory.  Ostrogotha  replies  that  he  abhors  such  a 
war;  that  they  are  kinsmen,  and  should  not  strive;  neverthe 
less,  that  he  will  not  yield  his  land.  A  stubbornly  fought 
contest  follows:  but  the  superiority  of  the  Gothic  cause  and 
the  Gothic  spirit  to  that  of  the  "dull"  Gepidae  gives  the  victory 
to  Ostrogotha,  and  the  Gepidae  flee  back  to  their  country. 
During  the  rest  of  Ostrogotha's  reign  the  Goths  enjoy  peace, 
till,  at  his  death,  Cniva  succeeds  and  again  invades  Roman 
territory1. 

How  much  of  this  is  history,  and  how  much  saga,  it  is  not 
easy  to  say.  But  there  seems  no  sufficient  reason  to  doubt 
that  Ostrogotha  is  a  real  person2.  His  invasion  was  fruitless, 
and  his  fame  was  crowded  out  by  that  of  later  and  more 
popular  Gothic  heroes,  Widigauja,  Ermanaric,  Theodoric.  But 
Ostrogotha's  name  is  the  first  that  meets  us  in  the  record  of 
two  among  the  great  things  of  the  world — the  Gothic  invasion 
of  the  Roman  Empire,  and  the  Gothic  heroic  stories  which  were 
to  be  the  delight  of  Europe  for  a  thousand  years. 


Ermanaric  and  Sonhild. 
And  ic  wees  mid  Eormanrice  ealle  tyrage. 

Very  different  was  the  fortune  of  Ostrogotha's  successor  in 
the  fourth  generation,  King  Ermanaric3,  who  died  about  the 
year  375,  and  whose  fame  remained  in  the  memory  of  German- 

1  Jordanes,  Getica  xvi,  xvn,  (89-100).  2  See  Appendix  C,  Eastgota. 

3  *Airmanareiks  according  to  the  spriba}  usage  of  the  Gothic  Bible, 


16  Widsith 

speaking  people  for  at  least  twelve  centuries1.  It  was,  however, 
as  the  "  colossal  type  of  a  ferocious  and  covetous  ruler,  raging 
against  his  own  kin,"  a  character  which  he  already  bears  in 
Widsith,  that  Ermanaric  was  remembered. 

The  historic  fact  of  Ermanaric's  reign  is  certified  by  the 
contemporary  and  reliable  evidence  of  Ammianus  Marcellinus2, 
who  records  how  Ermanaric  by  his  warlike  deeds  made  himself 
formidable  to  his  neighbours,  how  the  Huns  and  Alans  broke 
in  upon  his  extensive  and  prosperous  empire  and  ravaged  it, 
and  how  Ermanaric,  after  vain  attempts  to  rally  against  the 
even  greater  disasters  which  rumour  threatened,  sought  refuge 
in  a  voluntary  death.  A  death  so  unprecedented  in  the  annals 
of  German  kings  naturally  lent  itself  to  romantic  explanation 
and  comment ;  and  the  story,  as  given  by  Jordanes  almost  two 
centuries  later,  may  perhaps  contain  a  considerable  element 
of  fiction. 

Jordanes  tells  of  the  great  power  attained  by  Ermanaric 
nobilissimuis  Amalorum,  quern  merito  nonnulli  Alexandra  Magno 
conparavere  maiores,  and  how  he  ruled,  not  only  over  the 
German  races  and  the  Esths  of  the  coast,  but  also  over  the 
Wends  and  the  Sclaves,  "  tribes  who,  although  now,  thanks  to 
our  sins,  they  are  raging  round  us  on  every  side,  were  yet  at 
that  time  all  subject  to  Ermanaric3." 

This  empire,  stretching  from  the  Black  Sea  to  the  Baltic, 
seems  to  have  been  as  loosely  organized  as  it  was  widely 
spread,  and  it  fell  to  pieces  on  the  advent  of  the  Huns,  of 
whose  diabolical  origin  and  "  bestial  ferocity  "  Jordanes  gives  an 
account,  tinged  with  all  the  gusto  of  racial  antipathy.  Whilst 
Ermanaric  was  brooding  over  the  appearance  of  the  Huns,  the 
faithless  race  of  the  Rosomoni,  which,  amongst  others,  was  at 

1  A  Low  German  poem  was  printed  in  1560,  which  told  how  "  Dirick  van 
dem  Berne  [Theodoric]  he  siilff  twolffte  "  slew  "  den  Koninck  van  Armentriken, 
mit   veerde   halff    hundert   man."      Reprinted    by   Goedeke,    Hanover,   1851. 
A  reprint  is  also  given  by  Abeling  in  Teutonia,  vn,  Supplementheft.    This  very 
corrupt  version  shows  some  evidence  of  being  ultimately  derived  from  the  same 
original  as  the  HarriSismdl.     (See  Symons  in  Z.f.d.Ph,  xxxvin,  145-166.)     The 
poem  keeps  the  old  tradition  as  to  Ermanaric's  ferocity.     Dirick  says, 

'  De  Koeninck  van  Armentriken  de  ys  uns  suluen  gram, 
He  wil  vns  Heren  all  twrelue  yn  den  Galgen  hengen  laen.' 

2  xxxi,  3,  1  (recens.  v.  Gardthausen,  Vol.  n,  Lipsia,  1875). 

3  Getica,  xxin,  (119). 


Stories  known  to  Widsith:  Gothic  heroes  17 

that  time  tributary  to  him,  took  occasion  to  betray  him.  For 
the  king,  moved  with  fury,  had  caused  a  certain  woman  of  this 
race,  named  Sunilda,  to  be  torn  asunder  by  wild  horses  on 
account  of  the  treacherous  revolt  of  her  husband  ;  her  brothers, 
Sarus  and  Ammius,  in  vengeance  for  the  death  of  their  sister, 
attacked  Ermanaric  and  wounded  him  in  the  side,  so  that  he 
became  sick  and  infirm.  Balamber,  king  of  the  Huns,  took 
advantage  of  this  sickness  to  move  his  battle  array  against  the 
Ostrogoths,  from  whom  the  Visigoths  were  now,  owing  to  some 
dispute,  separated. 

In  the  midst  of  these  troubles,  Ermanaric,  overcome  by  his 
wounds,  and  the  incursions  of  the  Huns,  died,  full  of  days,  at 
the  age  of  one  hundred  and  ten  years1. 

Jordanes'  story  has  been  accepted  by  the  historians  as 
history2;  as  a  more  detailed  account  of  events  only  partially 
known  to  the  contemporary  Ammianus.  The  mythologists,  on 
the  other  hand,  are  convinced  that  it  is  myth3,  a  legendary 

1  Nam  Hermanaricus,  rex  Gothorum,  licet,  ut  superius  retulimus,  multarum 
gentium   extiterat   triumpbator,  de  Hunnorum   tamen   adventu  dam  cogitat, 
Bosomonorum  (Bosomanorum,  Bosomorum,  Rosimanorum)  gens  infida,  quee 
tune  inter  alias  illi   famulatum  exhibebat,   tali   eum    nanciscitur    occasions 
decipere.     dum  enim  quandam  mulierem   Sunilda  (Sunielh,  Sunihil;   Suani- 
hildam,  Holder)  nomine  ex  gente  memorata  pro  mariti  fraudulento  discessu  rex 
furore  commotus  equis  ferocibus  inligatam  incitatisque  cursibus   per  diversa 
divelli  prascipisset,  fratres  ejus  Sarus  et  Ammius  (Animus,  Aminus,  lammius) 
germanaa  obitum  vindicantes,  Hermanarici  latus  ferro  petierunt ;  quo  vulnere 
saucius  egram  vitam  corporis  imbecillitate  contraxit.     quam   adversam   ejus 
valitudinem  captans  Balamber  rex  Hunnorum  in  Ostrogotbarum  parte  movit 
procinctum,  a  quorum  societate  iam  Vesegothse  quadam  inter  se  intentione 
(contentione,   Holder)   seiuncti    habebantur.      inter  hffic   Hermanaricus    tarn 
vulneris  dolore  quam  etiam  Hunnorum  incursionibus  non  ferens,  grandevus 
et  plenus  dierum  centesimo  decimo  anno  vitas  suse  defunctus  est. 

Jordanes,  Getica  ed.  Mommsen,  cap.  xxiv  (129-30).  For  the  interpretation 
of  difficult  words:  gens  =  nation,  not  family:  famulatum  exhibebat=vto.B  subject, 
of  a  whole  tribe,  not  referring  to  the  personal  service  of  a  retainer :  discessus  = 
revolt,  not  flight,  see  Mommsen's  Index  (iv)  and  Jiriczek  <2)  57-59. 

2  Gibbon,  ed.  Bury,  1897,  in,  57,  91-2 ;  Hodgkin's  Italy,  i,  246  (but  cf.  in,  4). 

3  That  the  story  is  fictitious  has  been  argued  from  the  name  Sunilda,  which 
is  the  form  found  in  the  best  MSS  of  Jordanes.     This,  it  is  said,  is  the  Gothic 
*Sonahildi  or  *Sonihilds,  '  the  woman  who  atones ' ;  clearly  therefore  a  feigned 
name,  like  the  names  of  the  brothers  Sarus  and  Ammius — '  the  armed  ones.'  See 
Miillenhoff  in  Index  to  Mommsen's  Jordanes  ;  Symons  in  Pauls  Grdr.  (2)  in,  683  ; 
Jiriczek  (2)  63  ;  Boediger,  Die  Sage  von  Ermenrich,  248.      Boediger  would  make 
Jordanes'  story  purely  mythical  in  origin  ;  a  story  of  the  god  Irmin-tiu,  other 
wise  Ermanarikaz,  which  was  later,  he  thinks,  connected  with  the  story  of  the 
historic  Ermanaric  in  order  to  explain  that  king's  mysterious  death.     But  this 
is  more  than   doubtful.     Boediger   lays  weight  upon   the  names   Sarus  and 
Ammius,   "  Solche  einfachen   Namen    deuten  immer  auf  mythische  Trager." 
But  Sarus,  so  far  from  being  a  fictitious  name,  was  borne  by  a  chief  in  historic 

c.  2 


18  Widsith 

amplification  of  the  fact  recorded  by  the  Roman  historian. 
There  is  no  conclusive  evidence  in  either  direction.  The  story 
of  Ermanaric's  suicide,  as  told  by  Ammianus,  is  strange  and 
unaccountable,  but  it  rests  on  the  word  of  a  peculiarly  truthful 
historian :  if  it  is  true,  then  its  very  strangeness  only  gives  all 
the  more  reason  why  a  saga  should  have  been  invented  to 
account  for  Ermanaric's  death. 

Unfortunately,  true  or  not,  Jordanes'  account  leaves  much 
unsettled.  All  attempts  to  identify  and  explain  the  Roso- 
monorum  gens  infida  have  proved  inconclusive,  though  a 
stream  of  conjectures  is  forthcoming,  beginning  with  the 
attempt,  uusuccessful  though  supported  by  the  great  names 
of  Gibbon  and  of  Grimm,  to  identify  them  with  the  Russians1, 
down  to  the  more  recent  interpretations  of  the  word  as  the 
"red-haired"  or  "red-skinned,"  a  symbol  of  perfidy3,  or  the 
"  doughty8"  or  "  the  men  of  the  ice4." 

Jordanes'  tale,  at  best,  is  obscure,  and  the  difficulty  has 
been  rather  increased  by  attempts  to  force  his  words  so  as  to 
read  into  them  the  version  of  the  Swanhild  story,  which  we 
know  to  have  been  current  in  Scandinavia  three  centuries  after 

times  (Hodgkin's  Italy  i,  733  ;  cf.  Jordanes,  Romana,  321,  with  Miillenhoff's 
note).  As  to  the  name  Sunilda,  the  MSB  of  Jordanes  vary  greatly.  Sunielh, 
Sunihil,  are  found.  The  oldest  record  of  the  name,  in  Germany,  the  charter 
of  786,  gives  the  ambiguous  form  Suanailta ;  the  Icelandic  gives  Svanhildr.  So 
that  argument  from  the  form  of  the  name  seems  perilous;  and  indeed  there 
are  reasons  for  connecting  the  first  element  in  the  name  rather  with  sunja 
(truth)  than  son  (atonement) ;  see  Boer,  Ermanarich,  8.  Even  if  the  name  does 
mean  '  the  woman  who  atones '  this  would  not  involve  its  having  been  invented 
to  fit  the  story,  for  Sunilda's  death  does  not  lead  to  any  atonement,  but  rather 
is  the  cause  of  further  feud  (Panzer,  H.i.B.  41,  77). 

1  Gibbon,  ed.  Bury  in,  92 ;    Grimm,  G.D.S.  747-8.     Heinzel,  Hervararsaga 
(W.S.B.  cxiv,  102),  thinks  the  Bosomoni  were  probably  Slavs.     For  a  more 
recent  identification  with  the  Ruotsi  of  the  Baltic   see  Aspelin   (J.  B.)   La 
Rosomonorum  gens  et  le  Ruatsi,  Helsingfors,  1884 ;  and  cf.  Grotenfelt,  Die  Sagen 
von  Hermanarich  u.  Kullervo  in  FinniscJi-Ugrische  Forschungen,  n,  50  (1903). 

2  This  not  very  probable  suggestion  is  made  by  Bugge  (A.f.n.F.  i,  1-20). 
He  suggests  an  original  form  *Rusmunans,  and  points  out  that  the  treacherous 
Sibech,   Sifka,  who  in  the  later  versions  of  the  story  fills  the  place  earlier 
occupied  by  the  treacherous  Bosomoni,  and  their  chief,  as  the  evil  genius  of 
Ermanaric,  has  red  hair.     See  Thidreks  saga,  cap.  186. 

Bugge  (p.  9)  assumes  in  his  argument  that  the  deserter  was  chief  of  the 
Bosomoni ;  this  however  does  not  necessarily  follow  from  the  words  of  Jordanes, 
who  states  only  that  his  wife  belonged  to  that  race.  The  treachery  of  the 
Bosomoni  is  the  attack  by  Sarus  and  Ammius. 

3  Koegel,  Ltg.  i,  1,  148. 

4  *Hrusamans,  suggested  as  a  possible  alternative  to  Bugge's  interpretation 
by  Grienberger  (Z.f.d.A.  xxxix,  p.  159.     The  whole  article,  on  the  races  noted 
by  Jordanes  as  subject  to  Ermanaric,  is  important). 


Stories  known  to  Widsith:  Gothic  heroes  19 

his  day1.  With  this  interpretation  Sunilda  would  be  the  wife 
of  Ermanaric  and  pro  mariti  fraudulento  discessu  would  mean 
"  on  account  of  her  dishonest  desertion  of  her  husband ;  viz. 
Ermanaric."  But  this  rendering,  in  addition  to  doing  violence 
to  Jordanes'  Latin2,  is,  from  the  context,  impossible:  if  Jordanes 
had  regarded  Sunilda  as  Ermanaric's  unfaithful  wife,  he  would 
hardly  have  introduced  her  without  explanation  simply  as 
quandam  mulierem  Sunilda  nomine. 

Except  in  making  Ermanaric's  victim  his  wife,  this 
Scandinavian  version  keeps  fairly  near  the  original  story. 
Jormunrekk  sends  his  son,  and  a  treacherous  councillor 
Bikki,  to  woo  on  his  behalf,  and  to  escort  to  the  Gothic 
court,  the  maiden  Swanhild.  Bikki  first  urges  the  son  to 
woo  the  maiden  for  himself,  and  then  betrays  him  to  his  father. 
Jormunrekk  in  wrath  causes  his  son  to  be  hanged,  and  has 
Swanhild  bound  in  the  town  gate,  that  she  may  be  trodden  to 
death  by  horses.  But  she  is  so  fair  that  no  horse  will  trample 
on  her,  till  Bikki  counsels  that  her  eyes  be  bound3.  So  she 
dies,  but  her  brothers  Hamthir  and  Sorli,  clothed  in  enchanted 
armour  given  them  by  Guthrun  their  mother,  attack  Jormun 
rekk  in  his  hall  and  smite  off  his  hands  and  feet,  before  they 
are  overwhelmed  by  numbers  and  stoned  to  death. 

The  Norse  poets  do  not  trouble  to  make  the  action  of 
Bikki  the  traitor  intelligible :  no  motive  is  given  for  his  be 
traying  Swanhild  and  Jormunrekk's  son  to  death4.  Saxo 

1  Koegel,  Ltg.   i,   1,    147.    This  interpretation  was  earlier  suggested  by 
W.  Muller  in  his  Mythologie  der  deutschen  Heldensage,  Heilbronn,  1886,  163-4. 

2  Jiriczek(2)  58-9. 

3  The  account  given  by  Snorri  differs  in  some  details  from  that  given  in 
the  Vglsunga  saga,  and  chiefly  in  this,  that  the  murder  of  Swanhild  is  not 
deliberate,  but  the  result  of  a  sudden  impulse.    Jormunrekk,  as  he  rides 
from  hunting  in  the  forest,  sees  Swanhild  dressing  her  hair;  and  he  and  his 
men  tread  her  to  death  under  their  horses'  feet :   Sn.  Edda,  udg.  J6nsson, 
p.  189. 

4  A  portion  of  the  story  forms  the  subject  of  two  poems  at  the  end  of  the 
Elder  Edda,  the  Hamftismdl  and  Gvftrunarhvgt,  which  have  been  attributed  to 
the  tenth  century  (see  Banisch,  Zur  Kritik  u.  Metrik  der  Hambismdl,  Berlin 
dissertation,  1888,  29,  74),  and  it  is  told  by  Snorri  early  in  the  thirteenth 
century,  and  again  in  the  Vqlsunga  saga  somewhat  after  the  middle  of  that 
century.     All  these  versions  differ  slightly,  and  their  mutual  relations  are  by 
no  means  clear.     Still  more  important,  by  reason  of  their  early  date,  are  the 
allusions  in  the  Ragnars  drapa  of  Bragi  the  Old.     In  this  the  poet  describes  the 
shield  which  he  has  received  from  llagnar  Lodbrok.    This  shield  is  covered, 

2—2 


20  Widsith 

Grammaticus  tells  us  that  Bicco,  before  he  became  the  servant 
of  larmericus,  was  a  Livonian  prince,  whose  brothers  had  been 
slain  by  that  king,  and  who  thus  wreaks  his  vengeance  by 
causing  the  king  to  slay  his  dearest ;  but  this  is  clearly  a  sub 
sequent  addition  to  the  story,  reflecting  as  it  does  the  racial 
quarrels  of  a  later  age. 

Such  was  the  tale,  as  it  was  current  in  Scandinavian  lands 
from  at  least  the  ninth  century  throughout  the  Middle  Ages. 
But  both  in  England  and  in  continental  Germany  this  portion 
of  the  Ermanaric  story  seems  soon  to  have  died  out.  In 
England  the  names  Swanilda  and  Sorli  occur  in  charters; 
but  very  late,  whilst  their  form  makes  it  probable  that  they 
are  Scandinavian  introductions,  not  witnesses  to  native  English 
tradition:  Serlo  too  is  found,  but  this  again  is  a  foreign  form1. 
But  the  occurrence  of  the  name  of  Bicca  or  Becca  fixed  to 
different  English  localities,  Biccanhlew,  Biccanpol,  Beccanleah, 
Beccanford,  seems  to  show  that  his  part  in  the  story  was  at 
one  time  known  in  England ;  and  this  is  rendered  the  more 
probable  by  Widsith,  which  not  only  numbers  Becca  among  the 
retainers  of  Ermanaric,  but  mentions  the  tribe  subject  to  him — 
the  Baningas. 

like  that  of  Achilles,  with  images ;  the  figures  on  Bragi's  shield,  however,  refer 
to  specific  stories,  and  the  allusions  show  that  the  Swanhild  story  was  known 
in  the  North,  in  the  first  half  of  the  ninth  century,  in  substantially  the  same 
form  as  we  have  it  in  the  Volsunga  saga,  some  four  and  a  half  centuries  later. 
The  authenticity  of  Bragi's  song,  which  forms  an  important  landmark  in  the 
history  of  German  heroic  tradition,  has  been  disputed  by  Bugge,  on  the  ground 
of  grammatical  forms,  vocabulary,  metre,  style  and  subject  matter.  (Bidrag 
til  den  eldste  skalde-digtnings  historic,  1894.)  These  arguments  have  been 
weighed  at  great  length  by  F.  J6nsson  (Aarbpger  f.  nord.  Oldk.  u,  10,  4,  1895 
De  celdste  skjalde  og  deres  kvad),  and  more  briefly  by  Gering  (Z.f.d.Ph. 
xxvni,  111),  Kahle  (Litter  aturbl.  f.  PhiloL,  1895,  Sept.),  Mogk  (Lit.-Centralblatt, 
1895,  15,  540),  Panzer  (H.G.  155-7),  Jiriczek  (384),  with  the  unanimous  verdict 
that  the  case  against  the  authenticity  of  the  Eagnars  drdpa  has  not  been 
made  out. 

The  version  of  the  story  given  by  Saxo  Grammaticus  may  be  regarded 
as  a  compromise  between  the  Norse  and  the  (mainly  lost)  Low  German  versions. 
The  different  elements  have  been  separated  by  Olrik,  Sakses  Oldhistorie,  n,  1894, 
252-3  ;  in  the  imperfect  state  of  our  evidence  it  is  hardly  possible  to  say 
which  element  predominates.  For  different  views  on  this  subject  see  Symons 
in  Pauls  Grdr.fr)  in,  688;  Jiriczek(2)  115.  Ermanaric's  son  is  called  Bandve'r 
in  the  Norse  versions,  Broderus  in  Saxo. 

1  Binz  in  P.B.B.  xx,  209  thinks  it  Frankish.  If  the  references  in  the 
Quedlinburg  and  Wurzburg  chronicles  to  the  death  of  Ermanaric  are  really 
derived,  as  Schroeder  has  argued  (Z.f.d.A.  XLI,  24-32)  from  an  English  source, 
then  the  story  of  Sarus  and  Ammius  must  have  been  still  known  in  England 
in  the  ninth  century.  But  see  below,  p.  30  (footnote). 


Stories  known  to  Widsith:  Gothic  heroes  21 

Eormanric  and  Ealhhild  in  Widsith. 

That  Ermanaric  was  well  known  in  England  is  proved  by 
the  references  in  Old  English  heroic  poetry. 

In  Beowulf  there  is  mention  of  the  "wily  hatred1"  of 
Eormenric.  Not  dissimilar  is  the  reference  in  Dear's  Lament: 

We  have  heard  of  Eormanric's  wolfish  mind :  far  and  wide  he  ruled 
the  folk  of  the  kingdom  of  the  Goths  :  a  grim  king  was  he. 

But  the  fullest  and  clearest  reference  to  Eormanric  is  in  the 
central  passage  of  our  poem  : 

And  I  was  with  Eormanric  all  the  time,  there  the  king  of  the  Goths 
was  bounteous  unto  me.  Lord  of  cities  and  their  folk,  he  gave  me  an 
armlet,  of  pure  gold,  worth  six  hundred  shillings.  This  I  gave  into  the 
possession  of  my  lord  and  protector  Eadgils,  when  I  came  home :  a  gift 
unto  my  beloved  prince,  because  he,  lord  of  the  Myrgings,  gave  me  my 
land,  the  home  of  my  father.  A  second  ring  then  Ealhhild  gave  unto  me, 
noble  queen  of  chivalry,  daughter  of  Eadwine.  Through  many  lands  her 
praise  extended,  when  I  must  tell  in  song,  where  under  the  heavens  I 
best  knew  a  queen  adorned  with  gold  giving  forth  treasure  ;  when  Scilling 
and  I  with  clear  voice  raised  the  song  before  our  noble  lord  (loud  to  the 
harp  the  words  made  melody)  what  time  many  cunning  men  said  they  had 
never  heard  a  better  song.  Thence  I  wandered  through  all  the  land  of 
the  Goths... 

It  is  remarkable  that  whilst  certain  points  in  the  criticism 
of  Widsith  have  been  scrutinized  and  canvassed  with  almost 
excessive  keenness,  others  have  been  taken  on  trust  from  the 
days  of  the  first  editors.  Since  Ealhhild  is  here  mentioned  im 
mediately  after  Eadgils,  and  since  Widsith  the  Myrging  owes 
obligations  to  both,  Leo  conjectured  that  Ealhhild  was  queen  of 
the  Myrgings  and  wife  of  Eadgils2.  In  this  he  was  followed  by 
Lappenberg8.  Both  brought  forward  this  relationship  as  a 
mere  inference.  Later  scholars4  have  followed  them,  but  often 
without  any  expression  of  doubt.  Yet  there  is  nothing  in  the 
poem  which  points  at  all  conclusively  to  this  relationship.  All 
we  know  about  Ealhhild  is  that  she  is  a  daughter  of  Eadwine, 
who  is  apparently  the  same  Eadwine,  king  of  the  Lombards, 
who  is  mentioned  as  ^Elfwine's  father. 

1  searonfyas.     The  word,  however,  need  not  necessarily  have  a  bad  sense, 
cf.  Beowulf,  582. 

2  durch    Ealhhilden...die   (wie    es  scheint)   Fiirstin    der  Myrgingen   (wohl 
Eadgils  Gemahlin),  p.  75. 

3  Ealhhilde  wird  erwahnt,  wie  es  scheint,  als  Fiirstin  der  Myrgingen,  Gemahlin 
oder  Mutter  des  Koniges  derselben  Eadgils,  p.  175. 

4  e.g.  Thorpe  (510),  Ettmullerd)  12,  Miillenhoff,  Beovulf,  98 ;  Ten  Brink  in 
Pauls  Grdr.  (j  n,  1,  544 ;  Koegel,  Ltg.  i,  1,  139 ;  Stopford  Brooke,  i,  2. 


22  Widsith 

It  was  left  for  Richard  Heinzel,  who  was  not  dealing 
primarily  with  our  poem  at  all,  and  who  consequently  ap 
proached  it  without  any  prepossessions,  to  suggest  that 
Ealhhild  is  the  wife,  not  of  Eadgils,  but  of  Eormanric :  and 
that  we  have  a  reference  to  a  form  of  the  story  in  which 
Ealhhild  had  been  substituted  for  Swanhild,  and  the  Lombard 
dynasty  for  the  "  treacherous  Rosomoni."  Heinzel  threw  out 
this  suggestion  cursorily,  without  discussing  it  at  length,  and  it 
has  not  yet  been  sufficiently  scrutinized1.  Yet  the  interpreta 
tion  of  Widsith  depends  upon  it.  It  is  remarkable  how  many  of 
the  theories  of  previous  critics  have  been  built  upon  the  as 
sumption  that  Ealhhild  is  the  wife  of  Eadgils. 

The  discrepancy  in  the  names  Swanhild  and  Ealhhild  ought 
not  to  weigh  too  heavily  against  Heiuzel's  view.  Alike  in  epic 
song  and  in  everyday  conversation,  Swanhild  would  be  ab 
breviated  to  Hild.  In  song,  an  abbreviated  Hild  might  easily 
be  expanded  to  Ealhhild.  Both  changes  can  be  exactly 
paralleled.  Thus,  in  the  saga  of  Olaf  Tryggvason,  Jarl 
Eystein  has  a  daughter  named  Hild  or  Swanhild2.  The 
change  by  which  Hild(ico)  may  have  become  Grimhild 
(Kriemhild)  is  a  commonplace  of  the  history  of  the  develop 
ment  of  the  Niblung  story8.  So  that  there  would  be  nothing 
unprecedented  in  Swanhild  being  first  abbreviated  to  Hild  and 
then  expanded  to  Ealhhild4.  But  we  have  seen  that  it  is  quite 
uncertain  what  the  first  element  of  the  name  originally  was. 

1  Ueber  die  Hervararsaga,  p.  102  in  the  W.S.B.  cxiv,  11.     Heinzel's  view 
has  been  accepted  by  Jiriczek(2)  73,  Lawrence  in  Mod.  Philol.  iv,  351-3, 
Holthausen,  n,  164,  and,  with  some  doubt,  by  Gummere(2)  199;  it  has  been 
developed  by  Boer  (Ermanarich,  15-18). 

2  "  M6'Sir  J>eirra  var  Hildr  e$r  Svanhildr,  dottir  Eysteins  jarls,"  Fornmanna 
Sogur,  1825,  i,  5.     For  abbreviations  of  names  see  Franz  Stark,  Die  Kosenamen 
der  Germanen,  Wien,  1868;  and  a  note  by  Olsen  in  the  Aarbjger  for  Nordisk 
Oldkyndighed,  1905,  p.  72. 

3  See  Symons,  Sigfrid  u.  Brunhild  in  Zachers  Z.f.d.Ph.  xxiv,  29 ;  and,  to 
the  contrary,  Boer  in  Z.f.d.Ph.  xxxvn,  484.    Of.,  too,  Abeling,  206. 

4  Although  compound  names  in  Ealh-  are  not  uncommon  in  Old  English, 
the  name  Ealhhild  does  not  seem  to  have  been  current  in  England  in  historic 
times.     It  is  found  on  the  continent,  though  rarely.     In  the  ninth  century 
revenue  book  of  the  Abbey  of  St  Eemi  at  Reims   the  name   occurs  twice 
(Polyptique  de   VAbbaye    de   Saint  Remi,   par   B.  E.   Guerard,   Paris,   1853. 
Alchildis  ingenua,  p.  69  ;    Algildis  ingenua,  cum  infantibus,  p.  86).     In  819 
a  serf  named  Alachilt  is  granted,  with  many  others,  to  the  Abbey  of  Fulda 
(Codex  Diplomaticus  Fuldensis,   herausg.  Dronke,  Cassel,   1850).     The   name 
Alachilt,  Alahilt  occurs  also  in  the  Books  of  the  Confraternity  of  St  Gall 
(ed.  Piper  in  M.G.H.  Berlin,  1884).     See  Forstemann,  i,  pp.  53,  75. 


Stories  known  to  Widsith:  Gothic  heroes  23 

Probably  it  was  Son-  or  Sun-,  and  only  later,  when  it  became 
unintelligible,  was  this  corrupted  into  Swan.  Hild  is  the 
fixed  element  in  the  name  ;  and  there  is  no  reason  why  in  some 
versions  of  the  story  Sunhild  should  not  have  been  altered  to 
Ealhhild.  We  constantly  find  the  compound  names  of  heroes 
thus  changed  in  one  of  their  elements.  The  Hrothgar  of 
Beowulf  is  the  Roe,  Hroar  of  Scandinavian  tradition,  forms 
which  would  correspond  to  an  Old  English  Hrothhere.  So 
the  Eanmund  of  Beowulf  appears  in  Saxo  as  Homothus 
(i.e.  Eymothr  instead  of  Eymundr)1.  The  Sifrit  of  the  South 
is  the  Sigurd  of  the  North.  If  even  so  great  a  hero  as 
Sigfrid  could  not  keep  his  name  intact  in  passing  from  one  end 
of  Germania  to  the  other,  there  is  no  inherent  improbability 
in  the  name  Sonhild — Sunhild — Swanhild  having  been  cor 
rupted. 

It  becomes  then  a  question  of  what  evidence  we  have  in 
favour  of  identifying  the  Ealhhild  of  our  poem  with  Swanhild. 
At  least  five  points,  some  of  them  not  strong  in  themselves, 
deserve  to  be  weighed : 

(1)  Ealhhild  is  daughter  of  Eadwine,  apparently  the  famous 
Lombard  king  who  is  mentioned  elsewhere  (1.  74)  in  Widsith ; 
and  quite  apart  from  Heinzel's  theory,  it  is  thought  that  in 
Widsith  the  Lombard  story  has,  in  some  way  or  other,  been 
linked  on  to  the  Gothic.  How  this  took  place  we  cannot  say, 
but  that  Lombard  heroes  are  enumerated  among  Eormanric's 
household  was  pointed  out  half  a  century  ago  by  Mullenhoff2, 
and  seems  quite  possible.  Now  this  contamination  of  two  dis 
tinct  traditions  would  be  explicable  if  the  English  version  of 
the  story  gave  Eormanric  a  Lombard  princess  to  wife.  And 
this  might  easily  happen.  The  Rosomoni,  to  whom  Sunhild 
originally  belonged,  had  long  been  forgotten.  Yet  Eormanric's 
wife  must  belong  to  some  great  race.  To  whom  rather  than  to  the 
Lombards,  who  had  just  established  themselves  as  successors 
of  the  Goths  in  the  lands  of  Italy  ?  There  was  more  reason  to 
turn  Eormanric's  luckless  queen  into  a  Lombard  than  into  a 

1  Cf.  Olrik,  Sakses  Oldhistorie,  191.    For  other  changes  in  names  of  heroes 
of  tradition  see  Heusler  in  Z.f.d.A.  LII,  97,  etc. :  Heldennamen  in  mehrfacher 
Lautgestalt. 

2  Z,f.d.A.  xi,  278. 


24  Widsith 

Hellespontine,  which  she  is  in  Saxo1,  or  a  Volsung,  which  she  is 
in  the  VQlsunga  saga. 

Yet  we  must  not  place  too  much  weight  upon  this 
argument:  for  it  is  not  absolutely  certain  that  our  poet  re 
garded  Ealhhild  as  a  Lombard  princess,  whilst  the  supposed  list 
of  Lombard  heroes  inserted  into  the  catalogue  of  Eormanric's 
household  is  far  too  doubtful  for  us  safely  to  argue  from  it. 
The  supposed  combination  of  Gothic  with  Lombard  legend 
does  not,  then,  go  very  far  towards  proving  Heinzel's 
hypothesis. 

(2)  This  hypothesis  makes  it  easier  to  explain  why  our 
poet,  whilst  he  makes  Eormanric  give  to  Widsith  a  ring  of 
very  high  price,  yet  calls  him  a  wraty  wcerloga.     Remembering 
how  highly  generosity  to  retainers  in  general,  and  to  singers  in 
particular,  ranks  among  the  kingly  virtues  in  Old  English  heroic 
poetry,  it  is  likely  that  some  specific  evil  act  lies  in  the  back 
ground  in  order  to  justify  this  epithet  in  this  context. 

The  Ermanaric  of  tradition  certainly  was  a  "treacherous 
tyrant "  :  but  it  seems  hardly  fair  that  he  should  be  called  so  in 
the  poem  celebrating  that  Widsith  whom  he  had  treated  so  well. 
But  if  Widsith  owed  obligations  to  Ermanaric's  murdered  wife, 
then  the  epithet  becomes  appropriate  enough. 

(3)  A  detailed  examination  of  the  passage  dealing  with 
Eormanric's   gift   to  Widsith  favours  the  interpretation  that 
Ealhhild  is  the  queen  of  Eormanric,  who,  after  the  bountiful 
act  of  her  lord,  gives  Widsith  a  second  ring  in  the  Gothic  hall, 
rather  than  the  queen  of  Eadgils,  who  gives  him  the  ring  on 
his  return  home,  in  compensation  for  that  which  he  presents 
to  her  husband.     The  episode  deserves  consideration  for  the 
light  it  throws  on  the  manners  and  ideals  of  ancient  Germania. 

When  trade,  or  fortune  in  the  gift  hall  or  on  the  battlefield, 
had  put  into  the  hands  of  a  "  thegn  "  treasures  too  great  for  a 
private  gentleman  to  possess — an  armlet  or  necklace  of  sur 
passing  value,  a  king's  panoply,  a  tame  bear — custom  approved 
of  his  presenting  it  to  a  great  chief:  if  he  had  one,  to  his  own 
chief.  But  it  was  not  usual  for  the  chief  to  acknowledge  this 
gift  by  presenting  in  return  things  like  in  kind  but  inferior  in 
1  Ed.  Holder,  vni,  279-81. 


Stories  known  to  Widsith:  Gothic  heroes  25 

quality.  The  prince  makes  the  donor  his  personal  servant,  or 
gives  him  a  landed  estate,  or  weds  him  to  his  daughter.  It  is 
not  so  much  an  exchange  as  a  recognition  of  mutual  dependence. 
The  winnings  of  the  retainer  fall  to  the  chief:  the  chief  values 
wealth  only  as  he  may  share  it  with  his  retainers1.  Thus 
Beowulf  receives  from  Hrothgar  rich  gifts  for  his  service  at 
Heorot,  sword,  armour,  horses2 ;  jewels,  and  a  glorious  necklace 
from  Hrothgar's  queen3:  on  his  return  he  gives  armour,  sword 
and  horses  to  his  lord  Hygelac,  and  the  necklace  to  Hygd, 
Hygelac's  wife.  On  his  part,  Hygelac  gives  Beowulf  feudal 
domains,  placing,  as  he  does  so,  in  Beowulf  s  bosom  the  sword 
of  their  common  grandfather  Hrethel4.  Again,  when  Eofor  the 
Geat  slays  the  Swedish  king  Ongentheow,  he  presents  the  spoils 
to  Hygelac,  who  gives  him  in  return  land  and  wealth,  and  the 
hand  of  his  only  daughter5. 

A  not  dissimilar  episode  comes  in  the  Saga  of  Harold 
Hardrada6.  Authun,  an  Icelander,  comes  to  the  court  of 
Harold  with  a  bear  which  the  king  covets.  However,  Authun 
will  neither  sell  nor  give  the  beast  to  the  king,  but  declares 
his  intention  of  taking  it  to  Swein  of  Denmark,  with  whom 
King  Harold  is  at  war.  Harold  allows  him  free  passage ;  but 
on  his  way  back  he  is  to  come  and  tell  what  King  Swein  has 
given  in  return.  This  Authun  does, 

The  king  took  his  greeting  well.  "Sit  down,"  he  said,  "and  drink 
here  with  us,"  and  Authun  did  so.  Then  Harold  asked,  "  How  did  King 
Swein  requite  thee  for  the  bear  ?  "  Authun  replied,  "  In  that  he  accepted  it, 
Sir,  from  me."  "  I  would  have  requited  thee  so,"  said  the  king,  "  what 
more  reward  did  he  give  thee  ? "  Authun  replied,  "  He  gave  me  silver  to  go 
South  "  (on  a  pilgrimage  to  Rome).  Then  said  King  Harold,  "  To  many 
men  does  King  Swein  give  silver,  though  they  have  not  brought  him 
treasures.  What  more?"  "He  offered,"  said  Authun,  "to  make  me  his 
page  and  do  me  much  honour."  "  That  was  a  good  offer,"  said  the  king, 
"but  he  surely  did  more."  " He  gave  me,"  said  Authun,  " a  big  ship  with 
a  cargo  of  the  best."  "  That  was  magnificently  done,"  said  the  king,  "  but 
so  would  I  have  requited  thee.  Did  he  give  thee  more  1 "  Authun  said, 
"  He  gave  me  a  leather  bag  full  of  silver,  and  said  that  then  I  should  not 
be  destitute,  if  I  kept  that,  though  my  ship  were  wrecked  off  Iceland." 
"That  was  an  excellent  precaution  to  take,"  said  the  king,  "and  more 
than  I  should  have  done.  I  should  have  thought  we  were  quits  when  I 
had  given  thee  the  ship  and  cargo  :  did  he  requite  thee  yet  more  ? "  "  Of 

1  Cf.  Tacitus,  Germania  xiv.  2  1020-49. 

3  1192,  etc.  *  2152-2199.  8  2990. 

6  Fornmanna  Sogur,  Kaupmannahtffn,  1831,  vr,  297-307:  Wimmer,  Oldnordisk 
Laxelog,  1877,  55-60.  The  two  texts  differ  in  detail. 


26  Widsith 

a  truth,  Sir,"  said  Authun,  "  he  did  :  he  gave  me  this  ring  which  I  have  on 
my  hand,  and  said  it  might  happen  that  I  lost  all  my  wealth  and  the 
ship :  that  then  I  should  not  be  destitute  if  I  had  the  ring.  And  he  bade 
me  not  part  with  it,  unless  I  owed  so  much  to  some  great  man  that  I 
wished  to  give  it  him.  And  now  I  have  met  such  a  man  :  for  thou 
mightest  have  taken  from  me  both  the  bear  and  my  life  :  but  thou  didst 
give  me  free  passage  when  others  obtained  it  not."  The  king  received  the 
gift  graciously  and  gave  Authun  in  return  good  gifts  before  they  parted. 

But  if  Queen  Ellisif  had  stepped  down  from  the  dais  and 
offered  Authun  an  inferior  ring  in  exchange  for  the  gift  he  had 
just  made  to  King  Harold — Authun  would  no  doubt  have  ac 
cepted  it  with  his  usual  tact :  but  I  think  every  retainer  in  the 
hall  would  have  felt  that  a  mistake  had  been  made.  Nor  would 
Queen  Hygd  have  given  Beowulf  another  necklace  in  exchange 
for  the  glorious  one  which  he  gave  her. 

Now  the  armlet  given  by  Eormanric  is  of  extraordinary 
value :  for  Eormanric  was  the  richest  and  the  most  generous 
of  tyrants.  It  is  valued  at  six  hundred  shillings1.  It  would 
probably  have  been  held  ostentatious,  and  it  would  certainly 
have  been  imprudent,  for  a  minstrel  to  wear  treasure  worth 
the  price  of  his  own  life.  Nobody  but  Eormanric,  the  possessor 
of  fabulous  wealth2,  could  afford  to  give  such  an  armlet  to 
a  singer. 

In  giving  this  present  to  his  lord,  the  reward  Widsith  would 
expect  would  be,  as  Authun  said,  "that  he  should  accept  it." 
He  certainly  would  not  expect  an  inferior  ring  in  return.  It  is 
turning  a  gracious  act  of  love  and  loyalty  into  a  matter  of  mere 
barter  if  we  are  to  read  the  lines  as  Ten  Brink  and  the  rest 
read  them : 

Eadgils'  Gemahlin  aber,  Ealhhild,  entschddigte  den  Sanger  fur  das 
verschenkte  Kleinod  durch  einen  andern  Ring  3. 

On  the  other  hand,  if  Ealhhild  is  the  Gothic  queen,  her 
action  is  in  accordance  with  the  laws  of  Germanic  courtesy.  She 
follows  up  the  magnificent  present  of  Ermanaric,  her  lord,  by 
offering  the  poet  a  second  ring :  one  of  less  value,  naturally ; 
but  which  he  is  to  keep  for  her  sake,  in  memory  of  the  service 

1  See  Appendix  N,  On  the  beag  given  by  Eormanric. 

2  See  Saxo,  Book  VIH  (ed.  Holder,  p.  278),  for  an  account  of  the  treasure 
house  of  larmericus  :  cf.  too  Dietrichs  Flucht,  7854-7862. 

3  Ten  Brink  in  Pauls   Grdr.^)  n,  542.    So  Lawrence  speaks  of  it  as  a 
"business  transaction "  (Mod.  Philol.  iv,  369). 


Stories  known  to  Widsith:  Gothic  heroes  27 

he  has  done  her  in  escorting  her  to  the  hall  of  the  Goth.     And 
this  ring  Widsith  does  keep. 

An  argument  which  postulates  gentlemanly  feeling  among 
sixth  century  barbarians  may  seem  to  some  fantastic.  But  it 
can  be  further  urged : 

(4)  That    only   by   this    interpretation    does    the    whole 
passage  yield  consistent  sense.      "  Eormanric  gave  me  a  ring, 
which,  when  I  came  home,  I  gave  to  Eadgils  my  lord  (minum 
hleodryhtne).     Ealhhild  gave  me  another  ring.     Whenever  I 
had  to  sing,  I  sang  her  praises  through  many  lands  as  the  most 
generous  queen :    when  Scilling  and  I  sang   before  our   lord 
(uncrum  sigedryhtne),  many  men  said  they  never  heard  a  better 
song.     Thence  I  fared  through  the  whole  land  of  the  Goths." 

If  the  poet  rewards  his  benefactress  by  spreading  her  fame 
through  many  lands,  then  Eadgils'  land,  which  is  instanced,  can 
hardly  have  been  hers1.  Nor  can  we  understand  the  transition 
to  the  next  sentence,  "  Thence  I  fared  through  all  the  land  of 
the  Goths,"  if  Ealhhild's  gift  takes  place,  not  in  the  heart  of  the 
Gothic  land,  but  after  Widsith  has  returned  home  to  the  far- 
distant  Myrging  court2. 

How,  if  we  make  Ealhhild  the  wife  of  Eadgils,  are  we  to 
interpret  the  second  reference  to  Widsith's  lord  (uncrum 
sigedryhtne)  ?  It  is  inapplicable  to  Eormanric  ;  for  Widsith  is 
giving  an  example  of  how  he  rewarded  his  patroness  for  her 
gift  by  spreading  the  fame  of  her  generosity.  He  cannot  sing, 
in  the  hall  of  Eormanric,  of  a  generosity  which  he  does  not 
experience  till  he  returns  home  to  Eadgils'  hall.  Besides,  the 
word  dryhten  in  Old  English  poetry  always  implies  a  distinct 
tie  of  subjection.  In  the  mouth  of  Widsith  dryhten  should 
refer  to  his  feudal  chief  Eadgils,  not  to  Eormanric.  But  this 
it  can  hardly  do,  if  Ealhhild  is  the  wife  of  Eadgils.  For  as  we 
have  seen,  Widsith  is  giving  an  example  of  how  he  spread  her 
fame  through  many  lands,  and  he  cannot  have  done  this  by 
singing,  in  her  presence,  in  her  lord's  hall. 

(5)  Finally,  and  this  is  the  heavy  evidence,  the  introduction 

1  This  struck  Ten  Brink.     The  transition,  he  says,  is  abrupt  (p.  543). 

2  This  difficulty  had  before  been  felt  by  Moller  (V.E.  2,  3),  who,  assuming 
Ealhhild  to  be  Eadgils'  wife,  found  it  necessary  to  rearrange  the  text. 


28  Widsith 

tells  us  that  Ealhhild  accompanied  Widsith  to  the  house 
(not  of  Eadgils  the  Myrging,  but)  of  Eormanric  the  Goth : 
and  for  what  purpose  except  to  become  his  bride,  is  not 
clear1.  It  has  been  suggested  that  she  went  as  a  hostage2. 
But  this  does  not  fit  in  with  the  theory  of  those  who  hold 
that  she  is  wife  of  Eadgils ;  for,  if  Widsith  escorted  her  as  a 
hostage  to  the  court  of  Eormanric,  how  does  she  come  to  be  in 
Eadgils'  hall,  when  he  returns  home,  to  present  him  with 
another  armlet?  And,  though  we  know  from  Tacitus  that 
the  daughters  of  great  houses8  were  often  sent  as  hostages, 
we  may  well  doubt  whether  a  self-respecting  prince,  such  as 
we  may  suppose  Eadgils  to  be,  would  have  sent  his  wife. 

True,  many  critics  have  regarded  the  introduction  as  a  later 
addition ;  and  almost  certainly  they  have  been  right  in  so 
regarding  it4.  But  in  any  case  the  introduction  dates  from 
a  time  when  Old  English  verse  and  legend  were  living;  the 
poet  who  prefixed  it  had  our  poem  before  him  in  a  form 
certainly  much  purer  and  possibly  much  fuller  than  that 
in  which  it  has  come  down  to  us;  and  the  fact  that  he 
evidently  regarded  Ealhhild  as  wife  of  Eormanric  is  strong 
evidence  that  the  original  poem  implied  that  she  was  so. 

For  these  reasons  it  seems  best  to  regard  Ealhhild  as  the 
murdered  wife  of  Eormanric,  the  Anglian  equivalent  of  the 
Gothic  Sunilda  and  the  Northern  Swanhild.  Perhaps  however 
we  ought  to  discriminate.  That  Ealhhild  is  Eormanric's  wife 
appears  to  me  to  be  demonstrable :  that  legend  attributed  to 
her  the  same  tragic  story  as  to  Swanhild  is  probable  enough, 
but  not  equally  demonstrable. 

Ermanaric  and  the  Harlungs. 

fferelingas, 
Emercan  sohte  ic  and  Fridlan. 

That  the  story  of  Ermanaric  and  Swanhild  was  still  current 
in  the  eighth  century  in  continental  Germany  is  rendered 
probable  by  the  occurrence  of  the  name  Suanailta,  in  con 
nection  with  other  names  of  the  Ermanaric  cycle,  in  a  charter 

1  See  note  to  1.  6.  a  Chadwick  (138). 

8  puellje  nobiles.    Ger.  vin.  4  See  below :  Chap,  iv,  end. 


Stories  known  to  Widsith:  Gothic  heroes  29 

of  the  year  786.  Unless  a  very  striking  series  of  coincidences 
has  taken  place,  the  story  must  have  been  in  the  minds  of  the 
god-parents  who  gave  the  names1.  Yet,  alike  in  High  and  Low 
German  tradition,  Swanhild  was  soon  forgotten,  and  with  her 
the  motive  for  the  death  of  Ermanaric's  son2.  But  another  evil 
deed  was  attributed  to  Ermanaric :  the  murder  of  his  two 
nephews,  the  young  Harlungs,  brought  about  by  the  evil 
counsel,  perhaps  in  the  earliest  stories,  certainly  in  the  later 
ones,  of  his  henchman  Sibeche. 

From  the  tenth  century  onwards  there  are  several  references 
to  this  Ermanaric  story  in  the  Latin  chronicles  of  Germany:  of 
these  the  most  important  is  one  which  is  found,  with  only  slight 
variations,  in  the  chronicles  of  Quedlinburg  and  of  Wiirzburg3, 
and  which  introduces  the  names  of  three  important  actors  in 
the  story  who  are  known  to  us  from  Widsith,  Freotheric  and 
the  Harlung  brethren  (Herelingas)  Emerca  and  Fridla.  These 
two  chronicles  date,  the  first  a  few  years  before,  the  second 
a  few  years  after  the  year  1000 — and  the  story  they  tell  is 
this : 

At  that  time  Ermanaric  ruled  over  all  the  Goths,  more  cunning  than 
all  in  guile,  more  generous  in  gifts ;  who  after  the  death  of  Frederic  his 
only  son,  brought  about  by  his  own  wish,  hanged  from  the  gallows  his 
nephews,  Embrica  and  Fritla.  He  drove  likewise  from  Verona  Theodoric 
his  nephew  at  the  instigation  of  his  nephew  Odoacer,  and  compelled  him 
to  dwell  with  Attila  in  exile... Ermanaric,  King  of  the  Goths,  was  slain  in 
shameful  wise,  as  was  fit,  by  the  brethren  Hamido,  Sarilo  and  Odoacer, 
whose  father  he  had  killed,  after  they  had  first  cut  off  his  hands  and  his 
feet*. 

1  See  Miillenhoff  in  Z.f.d.A.  xn,  302-6.    On  the  other  hand,  it  might  be 
argued  that,  without  postulating  anything  more  than  the  ordinary  working  of 
the  laws  of  chance,  an  occasional  combination  recalling  the  grouping  of  heroic 
Btory  might  be  expected,  in  view  of  the  fact  that  the  records  of  proper  names 
which  have  come  down  to  us  from  the  '  Dark  Ages '  are  comparatively  numerous. 

2  Yet  different  forms  of  the  names  Sonhild  and  Swanhild  continue  in  frequent 
use.     See  Pertz  passim,  especially  SS.  t.  vi;  and  Langebek  iv,  83. 

8  Chronicon  Wirziburgense  in  Pertz,  fol.  SS.  t.  vi,  1844,  p.  23. 

4  Eo  tempore  Ermenricus  super  omnes  Gothos  regnavit,  astutior  omnibus  in 
dolo,  largior  in  dono ;  qui  post  mortem  Friderici  filii  sui  unici,  sua  perpetratam 
voluntate,  patrueles  suos  Embricam  et  Frithlam  patibulo  suspendit.  Theodericum 
timilitfr  patruelem  suum,  instimulante  Odoacro  patruele  suo,  de  Verona  pulsum 
apud  Attilam  exulare  coegit. ...Ermenricus  rex  Gothorum  a  fratribus  Hamido  et 
Sarilo  et  Odoacro,  quorum  patrem  interfecerat,  amputatis  manibus  et  pedibus, 
turpiter,  uti  dignus  erat,  occisus  est. 

We  cannot  be  certain  whether  this  exactly  represents  a  current  version,  or 
is  the  chronicler's  attempt  at  harmonizing  different  stories  known  to  him. 

The  Wiirzburg  Chronicle  is  quoted  in  preference  to  the  Quedlinburg  Annals, 
because  it  tells  the  story  more  clearly  than  does  the  extant  text  of  Quedlinburg; 


30  Widsith 

This  gives  a  very  rough  summary  of  the  story,  as  current  in 
continental  Germany  during  the  Middle  Ages.  Though  Swan- 
hild  has  gone,  it  is  still  remembered  that  Ermanaric,  intentionally 
or  unintentionally,  caused  the  death  of  his  son,  or  sons1.  But 
it  is  more  as  the  betrayer  of  his  nephews,  the  "  Harlungen,"  and 
still  more  as  the  foe  of  his  nephew  Theodoric  or  Dietrich,  that 
Ermanaric  is  remembered. 

In  one  of  the  papers  which  Mullenhoff  left  behind  him, 
unpublished  and  indeed  hardly  legible,  the  origin  of  the 
Harlung  story,  in  the  light  of  comparative  mythology,  is  dis 
cussed  with  a  marvellous  erudition.  The  paper,  deciphered  by 
the  pious  care  of  a  disciple,  was  published  in  1886 2:  it  is  one  of 
the  most  valuable  of  MullenhofFs  many  contributions  to  the 
history  of  German  heroic  song.  According  to  Mullen  hoff  the 
Harlungen  were  originally  twin  divinities,  comparable  to  the 
Castor  and  Pollux  of  Grecian  story.  They  are  sent  by  the 
Heaven-God,  Irmin-tiu,  the  Germanic  equivalent  of  Zeus  or 
Jupiter3,  to  woo  for  the  God  the  sun-maiden,  bedecked  with 

although  it  is  quite  possible  that  the  entry  in  Wilrzburg  is  derived  from  an 
earlier  MS  of  Quedlinburg.  (See  H.  Bresslau,  Die  Quellen  des  Chronicon  Wirzi- 
burgense  in  the  Neues  Archiv  der  Gesell.  f.  altere  deut.  Geschichtskunde,  xxv, 
1900,  pp.  32-3.) 

Schroeder  has  argued  (Z.f.d.A.  XLI,  27,  etc.),  from  the  forms  of  the  proper 
names,  that  this  reference  to  the  Ermanaric  story  was  derived  from  an  English 
source.  I  cannot  agree  with  this  view.  The  form  Adaccaro,  found  in  Quedlinburg 
for  Odoacro,  is  hardly  English.  Schroeder  argues  that  the  use  of  the  contracted 
form  Frithlam  points  to  England.  But  we  are  not  certain  that  the  original 
form  in  the  source  of  Quedlinburg  and  Wiirzburg  was  contracted :  the  Bamberg 
Codex  of  Wilrzburg  gives  Frithelam  (see  Bresslau).  And  in  any  case  it  is  not 
clear  that  the  contracted  form  was  peculiarly  English :  against  Fridla  in  Widsith 
we  have  Frfyela  in  the  charter  (Birch,  1002 :  see  below,  p.  34). 

1  Cf.  Dietrichs  Flucht  2457,  etc. 

Ez  gewan  der  KUnic  Ermrich 
einen  sun,  der  hiez  Friderich, 
den  er  sit  versande 
hin  ze  der  Wilzen  lande. 
dar  an  man  sin  untriuwe  sach: 
nu  seht  wie  er  sin  triuwe  brach 
an  sinem  liebem  kinde! 
Cf.  also  Thidreks  saga  c.  278-80,  303,  307. 

2  Z.f.d.A.  xxx,  217-  Frija  und  der  Halsbandmythus. 

8  That  Tin  was  equivalent  to  Zeus,  phonetically  and  mythologically,  was, 
when  Mullenhoff  wrote,  regarded  as  one  of  the  few  pieces  of  firm  land  in  the 
mythological  quagmire  (cf.  Noreen,  Altisldndische  Grammatik,  Halle,  1892, 
§  68,  7).  That  the  two  names  do  not  exactly  correspond  phonetically  has  been 
pointed  out,  however,  by  Streitberg  (I.F.  i,  514).  But  Streitberg  cites  parallels 
for  the  phonetic  variation,  and  adheres  to  the  identification  on  mythological 


Stories  known  to  Widsith:  Gothic  heroes  31 

jewels,  chief  among  which  is  the  "  Brisingo  meni."  They  are, 
however,  false  to  their  trust,  woo  the  maiden  for  themselves, 
and  fall  victims  to  the  wrath  of  the  god  whom  they  have 
deceived.  Mullenhoff  argued  that  the  likeness  of  this  story 
of  the  vengeance  of  Irmin-tiu  upon  the  Harlungs  to  the  story  of 
the  vengeance  of  Ermanaric  upon  his  wife  and  son,  and  the 
similarity  of  the  name  of  the  avenger  in  each  case,  caused  the 
two  to  be  confused :  and  the  Gothic  king  came  to  be  credited 
with  having  slain,  not  only  his  son,  but  also  his  nephews,  the 
two  young  Harlungs. 

The  glamour  which  must  always  surround  the  posthumous 
work  of  a  great  scholar,  and  the  learning  and  skill  displayed 
by  Mullenhoff  in  piecing  together  his  materials,  disarmed 
criticism  for  the  moment ;  and  in  the  best  recent  surveys  of 
Germanic  heroic  story  and  mythology  Miillenhoff's  mosaic  of 
myth  has  been  accepted1.  Yet  it  is  pure  conjecture2.  We 
have  no  proof  that  the  "  Brisingo  meni "  was  ever  in  the  hands 
of  the  Harlungs,  or  that  its  possession  by  Ermanaric  is  in  any 
way  connected  with  their  death.  Indeed  it  is  quite  conceivable 
that  the  Harlungs  are  derived  not  from  any  mythical  figures, 
but  from  some  historic  tribe  or  princely  house,  perhaps  actually 
overthrown  by  Ermanaric,  perhaps  supposed  in  later  story  to 
have  been  so  overthrown3. 

t 

Now  whether  Ermanaric  was  from  the  beginning  the  typical 
tyrant  and  oppressor  of  heroic  legend  is  not  clear.  We  cannot 
be  certain  whether  his  evil  fame  is  due  to  the  attribution  to 
him  of  the  murder  of  the  Harlungs4,  or  whether  this  attribution 
is  due  to  his  evil  fame5.  But  even  the  blackest  of  tyrants  needs 

grounds.  Bremer  (I.F.  in,  301-2)  regards  the  phonetic  difficulties  as  in 
superable,  and  points  out  that  the  German  Tiwaz  is  the  war-god,  and  not  the 
Heaven-Father.  Yet  the  identification  seems  fairly  certain.  Cf.  Mogk  in  Pauls 
Gfrdr.(2)  in,  313;  B.  Meyer,  178;  Golther,  200,  etc. 

1  Symons  in  Grdr.<2)  in,  685;  Jiriczek(i)  100;  B.  Meyer,  218-9  (broadly). 

2  Cf.  Panzer,  H.i.B.  84,  etc.  89,  etc. ;  Boer,  Ermanarich,  66. 

3  Cf.  Boer,   Ermanarich,  80.     The  Harlungs  cannot   be  derived  from   the 
Heruli,  as  suggested  by  Grimm  (G.D.S.  472)  and  recently  urged  by  Matthaei 
(Z.f.d.A.  XLIII,  319,  etc.).     Harlung  and  Erl  are  too  different  linguistically  to 
be  easily  identified,  and  there  is  no  evidence  demanding  such  identification. 
See  note  to  1.  87. 

4  Jiriczek(?)  66,  103;  Bojunga  in  P.B.B.  xvi,  548. 
8  Symons  in  Pauls  Grdr.(a)  m,  685. 


32  Widsith 

some  motive  for  his  evil  acts,  and  this  motive  was  given  by  the 
evil  counsellor  Sibich  [Sifka  in  the  Thidreks  saga]  who,  together 
with  his  antagonist  and  foil  Eckehart,  the  typical  faithful 
retainer,  may  have  belonged  to  the  Harlung  story  even  from 
the  beginning1.  Sibich,  like  lago,  does  evil  for  the  love  of  it : 
but  his  actions  in  the  North  German  story,  as  recorded  in  the 
Thidreks  saga,  are  made  more  plausible  by  the  motive  of 
revenge :  his  wife  has  been  seduced  during  his  absence  from 
the  country  by  Erminrek :  and  he  sets  to  work  to  bring  about, 
by  his  evil  counsels,  the  downfall  of  the  tyrant.  By  the  advice 
of  Sifka  and  of  Sifka's  wife,  Erminrek  causes  the  death  of  his 
sons;  of  two  unintentionally,  and  of  the  third  deliberately2;  he 
then  compasses  the  death  of  his  two  nephews  from  Harlung 
land3,  and  finally  is  persuaded  to  attack  his  nephew  Thithrek 
— Theodoric  of  Verona. 

There  is  an  obvious  parallel  between  the  original  Harlung 
myth  of  the  faithless  wooers,  as  it  has  been  reconstructed  by 
Mtillenhoff,  and  the  Norse  story  of  the  prince  who,  sent  to  woo 
Swanhild,  betrays  his  trust.  It  is  quite  possible  that  Norse 
tradition,  though  it  does  not  record  the  Harlung  myth4,  derives 
from  a  version  which  has  nevertheless  been  influenced  by  it, 
and  that  the  modifications  of  the  story  which  make  Swanhild 
the  wife  of  the  tyrant,  and  his  own  son  the  object  of  that 
tyrant's  jealousy,  are  due  to  the  influence  of  the  Harlung 
story.  The  difficulty  of  this  supposition  is  that  it  leaves  us 
nothing  but  the  likeness  of  the  names  Irmin-tiu  and  Ermanaric 
to  account  for  the  contamination  of  the  two  stories5.  Should 
the  jealousy  motive  of  the  Norse  story  be  simply  a  reflection  of 
the  Harlung  myth  it  might  follow  that  Bikki  is  merely  a 

1  This  however  is  doubtful,  especially  in  view  of  the  absence  of  Ecgheard 
from  Widsith.    See  Binz  in  P.B.B.  xx,  209-10;    Panzer,  H.i.B.  85;    Boer, 
Ermanarich,  72,  etc. 

2  Erminrek  has   in  this    version   three    sons,  Frithrek,   Eeginballd,  and 
Samson  (Thidreks  saga,  277-80). 

8  of  Aurlungalandi  (Thidreks  saga,  281). 

4  Saxo's  reference  to  the  Harlung  story  is  due,  no  doubt,  to  Low  German 
influence. 

6  See,  however,  Boediger  in  Weinholds  Zeitschrift  i,  247.  Koediger's 
suggestion  that  Ermanarikaz  was  an  old  title  of  Tiwaz  would  make  the 
contamination  of  his  story  with  that  of  the  historic  king  more  intelligible.  But 
any  evidence  that  this  title  ever  belonged  to  Tiwaz  is  wanting. 


Stories  known  to  Widsith:  Gothic  heroes  33 

duplicate,  a  reproduction,  of  the  faithless  Sibich1.  On  the 
other  hand,  it  is  more  likely  that  they  are  independent 
figures,  Bikki  the  traitor  proper  to  the  Swanhild  story,  Sibich 
to  the  Harlung  story2;  and  this  is  supported  by  the  mention  in 
our  poem  of  both  figures,  Becca  and  Sifeca. 


Eormanric  and  the  "Herelingas"  in  Widsith. 

The  mention  of  the  Harlungs  in  Widsith  is  important,  as 
showing  that  already  their  story  formed  a  part  of  the  Ermanaric 
cycle.  In  this  connection  it  may  be  noted  that,  in  Beowulf,  the 
Brosinga  mene  is  in  the  hands  of  Eormenric,  and  is  carried  off 
by  Hama.  Whether  there  was  any  relation  between  this  and 
the  Harlung  story  we  cannot  tell. 

From  the  absence  of  further  references  in  Old  English 
literature,  and  of  persons  named  after  the  characters  of  the 
story,  Eormanric,  Emerca,  and  Fridla,  it  has  been  argued  that 
this  story  of  Eormanric  died  out  early  in  England.  A  Kentish 
King  lurmenric3  is  recorded;  elsewhere  the  name  does  not 
meet  us.  But  it  may  well  have  been  that  these  names  were 
regarded  as  too  ill-omened.  We  need  to  be  careful  in  deducing 
arguments  as  to  survival  of  legend  from  personal  names. 

That  the  Harlung  story  had  at  one  time  a  footing  in 
England  is  proved  by  the  occurrence  of  Herling,  principally  in 
place  names4.  We  cannot  draw  conclusions  from  the  fact  that 
we  find  no  Englishman  with  the  name  Sifeca  or  Seofeca : 
.perhaps  his  story  was  known  too  well  for  any  father  to  give 
the  traitor's  name  to  his  son.  It  is  noteworthy  that  in  the 
topography  of  Saxon  Berkshire  we  find  the  name  of  the  traitor 
not  far  from  that  of  one  of  his  victims,  Seofocan  wyr®  near 

1  Jiriczek(2)  112. 

2  Symons  in  Pauls  Grdr.  (2)  in,  686.     In  the  earlier  edition  of  the  Grundriss 
Symons  had  hazarded  the  guess  that  Bikka  was  the  unrecorded  name  of  the 
husband  of  Swanhild,  Grdr.^)  n,  41.     In  this  he  had  been  partly  anticipated 
by  Bugge  (Arkiv  f.  Nordisk  Filologi,  i,  8,  1883),  "Der  synes...at  vsere  god  Grund 
tU  at  gjenfinde  denne  troLtfse  Baadgiver  i  Sunildas  af  Jordanes  omtalte  Mand." 

3  He  was  father    of   Ethelberht    of    Kent   (see    the    early  ninth  century 
genealogies  in  Sweet's  Oldest  Eng.  Texts,  171,  and  cf.  Florence  of  Worcester, 
ed.  Thorpe,  1848,  i,  12). 

4  Binz  in  P.B.B.  xx,  209. 

c.  3 


34  Widsith 

Frilpela  byrtg1.  There  is  then  no  reason  to  doubt  that  the 
Sifeca  mentioned  in  Widsith  is  the  traitor  of  the  Harlung 
story2. 

Do  these  two  stories  of  Swanhild  and  of  the  Harlungs 
involve  a  different  view  of  Erraanaric  :  and,  if  so,  can  we  trace 
in  Widsith  different  strata,  different  views  of  the  character  of 
the  great  Gothic  tyrant  ? 

It  has  been  asserted  with  some  confidence  that  we  can3:  that 
in  the  oldest  Gothic  story  Ermanaric  was  a  national  hero,  who 
only  slowly,  and  especially  through  the  murder  of  the  Harlungs — 
a  story  which  had  originally,  as  these  critics  suppose,  nothing  to 
do  with  him — passed  into  the  typical  tyrant,  the  murderer  of 
his  kin.  Thus  it  has  been  argued  by  Bojunga  that : 

"  This  darkening  of  Ermanaric's  character  has  not  yet  taken 
place  in  the  older  parts  of  Widsith,  although  the  Harlung 
story  appears  to  be  already  known.  In  v.  88  ff.  Ermanaric 
appears  as  a  generous  patron  of  the  arts,  whilst  in  the  late 
introduction  (v.  8 — 9)  he  is,  in  accordance  with  later  story, 
characterized  as  wrd}>  wcerloga." 

Here  again,  the  deductions  hardly  seem  warranted  by  the 
facts.  There  is  nothing  inconsistent  in  a  tyrant  being  a 
generous  patron  of  the  arts :  and  Widsith  is  not  alone  in 
asserting  the  open-handedness  of  Ermanaric4.  It  was  his 
essential  feature  in  story  to  be  at  one  and  the  same  time 
"  more  cunning  than  all  in  guile,  more  generous  in  gifts5." 

1  Miillenhoff  in  Z.f.d.A.  xxx,  225 ;  Birch,  Cart.  Sax.  in,  201  (No.  1002). 

2  This  has  been  disputed  by  Binz,  P.B.B.  xx,  207-8.     Heinzel  has  shown, 
conclusively,  that  two  of  the  champions  mentioned  as  retainers  of  Eormenric 
are  characters  of  the  Hervarar  saga.     Binz  would  go  further,  and  identify 
Sifeca  with  Sifka,  the  Hunnish  mistress  of  the  Gothic  king  Heithrek  of  the 
Hervarar  saga.     But  phonetically  this  has  no  advantage  over  the  old  identifi 
cation  of  Sifeca  with  the  traitor,  whilst  in  other  respects  it  is  inferior :  for  the 
name  occurs  in  Widsith  as  that  of  a  retainer  of  Ermanaric,  which  Sifeca  the 
traitor  was,  but  Sifka  the  Hunnish  concubine  certainly  was  not.   The  conjecture 
of  Binz  has,  however,  been   supported  by  Jiriczek(2)  73;   Panzer,  H.i.B.  84; 
Boer,  Ermanarich,  60  (with  some  hesitation). 

3  Bojunga  in  P.B.B.  xvi,  548.     Similarly  Holier  has  seen  between  11.  8,  9 
and  89  a  discrepancy  pointing  to  difference  of  authorship  ( V.E.  33).     Thorpe 
in  his  edition  tried  to  account  for  the  supposed  inconsistency  by  assuming 
a  gap  in  the  text.     See  note  to  1.  9  of  text. 

4  Compare,  for  example,  Alpharts  Tod,  207:  Thidreks  saga,  322. 

5  Astutior  omnibus  in  dolo,  largior  in  dono.     Chronicon  Wirziburgense  in 
Pertz,  SS.  t.  vi,  1844,  p.  23. 


Stories  Imown  to  Widsith:  Gothic  heroes  35 

Nor  can  we  be  at  all  certain  that  any  such  distinction  as 
Bojunga  assumes,  differentiated  the  Ermanaric  of  sixth  century 
tradition  from  the  Ermanaric  of,  say,  eighth  century  tradition. 

No  doubt  as  time  went  on  Ermanaric  became  more  and 
more  the  typical  tyrant,  and  was  made  responsible  for  one  evil 
deed  after  another.  The  murder  of  his  wife  and  the  treachery 
towards  his  nephews  are  clearly  not  historical :  we  can  trace  the 
different  accretions  of  tradition  by  which  these  crimes  come  to  be 
attributed  to  the  great  Gothic  king.  But  already  in  the  sixth 
century  Ermanaric  had  probably  the  reputation  of  a  cruel 
tyrant.  For  Cassiodorus,  in  summing  up  the  characteristic 
virtues  of  all  the  Amal  kings,  as  mirrors  in  which  the  princess 
Amalasuintha  may  perceive  her  own  merits,  makes  no  mention 
of  him1.  Nor  is  it  quite  the  case,  as  has  been  urged,  that  this 
omission  can  be  accounted  for  by  the  fact  that  there  was  no 
tertiwm  comparationis  between  the  victorious  Ermanaric  and 
the  daughter  of  Theodoric ;  no  virtue  belonging  to  Ermanaric 
which  could  be  attributed  to  a  woman2.  His  open-handedness 
might  certainly  have  been  quoted,  the  more  so  as  largitas,  the 
most  essential  of  royal  virtues  to  the  Germanic  mind,  has  no 
representative  in  Cassiodorus'  list. 

The  omission,  then,  of  the  greatest  name  in  the  whole  list 
of  Amalasuintha's  ancestors  can  only  be  the  result,  either  of  a 
fault  in  our  text3,  or  of  a  feeling  that  the  great  conqueror  was, 
after  all,  not  quite  a  credit  to  the  family.  If  then  Ermanaric 
left  behind  him  a  doubtful  fame,  even  among  those  Goths 
whose  mightiest  monarch  he  had  been,  we  can  the  more  easily 
understand  how  readily,  later,  the  slaughter  of  the  Harlungs 
came  to  be  attributed  to  the  typical  tyrant  king,  and  how  this 
slaughter  ceased  to  be  the  righteous  retribution  of  an  outraged 
god,  and  became  the  act  of  a  grasping  and  avaricious  tyrant. 


1  Enituit  enim  Hamalus  felicitate,  Ostrogotha  patientia,  Athala  mansuetudine, 
Winitarius  cequitate,   Unimundus  forma,    Thorismuth  castitate,  Walamer  fide, 
Theudimer  pietate.     Cassiodori  Varies  xi,  1 ;  ed.  Th.  Mommsen. 

2  Koediger  in  Weinholds  Zeitschrift,  i,  243;  Jiriczek(2)  r,  67. 

3  Mommsen  in  a  note  to  his  Jordanes  (p.  76)  suggests  that  the  name  of 
Athala  has  been  inserted  in  the  text  of  Cassiodorus,  by  error,  for  that  of 
Ermanaric.    But   this  seems  unlikely,  for  Athala's  virtue  mansuetudo  would 
hardly  have  been  chosen  as  the  conqueror's  strong  point.     Athal  is  vouched  for 
by  Jordanes'  genealogy  (xiv,  79) ;  he  is  grandson  of  Ostrogotha. 

3—2 


36  Widsith 

The  fact,  therefore,  that  in  the  introduction  to  Widsith 
Eormanric  is  roundly  denounced  is  not  enough  to  prove  that 
introduction  a  later  addition.  It  probably  is  so :  but  we  shall 
need  more  evidence  than  this. 


Theodoric  of  Verona. 

Last  and  longest  remembered  of  the  evil  deeds  of  the 
Ermanaric  of  story  was  his  tyranny  and  treachery  towards  his 
nephew  Theodoric. 

As  a  matter  of  history  Theodoric  was  born  on  the  day  when 
the  news  reached  his  father's  house  of  the  final  victory  which 
liberated  the  Goths  from  that  subservience  to  the  Huns  into 
which  they  had  fallen  on  the  death  of  Ermanaric  eighty  years 
before.  But  this  liberty  only  meant,  during  the  whole  of 
Theodoric's  boyhood  and  youth,  a  state,  half  of  dependence  upon 
the  Eastern  empire,  half  of  hostility  to  it,  always  of  penury. 
At  the  age  of  twenty  Theodoric  became,  by  the  death  of  his 
father  Theodemer1,  leader  of  this  little  nation  of  soldiers  out  of 
employ.  In  488  he  received  from  the  Eastern  emperor  per 
mission  to  try  his  fortune  in  Italy,  then  ruled  by  Odoacer  and 
a  miscellaneous  host  of  German  mercenaries.  So  Theodoric 
invaded  Italy  with  the  whole  Ostrogothic  nation,  taking  with 
him  remnants  of  the  Rugian  people  under  their  king  Frederic, 
who  had  a  blood  feud  to  avenge  upon  Odoacer.  After  a  four 
years  struggle,  marked  by  his  great  victories  of  the  Isonzo,  of 
Verona  and  of  the  Adda,  prolonged  by  the  treachery  of  his 
allies,  first  of  Tufa  and  then  of  Frederic,  Theodoric  at  last  slew 
Odoacer  in  his  palace  at  Ravenna  on  March  loth,  493.  Then 
followed  his  thirty-three  years  of  just  and  peaceful  rule.  "  He 
cared  for  justice  above  all  things,  and  was  a  true  king2." 

But  Theodoric  had  not  been  dead  ten  years  when  a  spas 
modic  revival  of  the  strength  of  the  Eastern  empire  led  to  a 
war  between  the  Gothic  nation  and  their  Rugian  allies  on  the 
one  hand,  and,  on  the  other,  the  "  Roman  "  army  of  mercenaries 
drawn  from  three  continents,  and  led  by  two  great  military 

1  M.H.G.  Dietmar;  O.N.  pioftmarr.  2  Procopius,  Bell.  Gott>,  i,  1. 


Stories  known  to  Widsith:  Gothic  heroes  37 

geniuses,  first  Belisarius,  then  Narses.  Eighteen  years  of  in 
cessant  fighting  followed.  The  Goths  were  hampered  at  the 
outset  by  the  incompetence  of  their  leaders :  and  all  the  heroism 
of  later  chiefs,  when  war  had  brought  the  right  men  to  the  front, 
failed  to  redress  the  balance.  Five  times  was  Rome  taken  and 
retaken :  twice  the  Goths  wore  out  their  strength  in  unsuccessful 
attacks  upon  the  massive  Aurelian  walls,  before  the  last  great 
pitched  battle  took  place  at  the  foot  of  Mount  Vesuvius.  The 
Byzantine  historian's  account  of  this  reminds  us  of  the  Old 
English  lay  of  Maldon.  The  Goths  dismounted  for  the  fight, 
and  the  last  Gothic  king  placed  himself,  with  his  shield-bearers, 
in  the  forefront  of  the  battle,  changing  his  shield  as  often  as  it 
became  too  heavy,  from  the  weight  of  the  enemy's  javelins  fixed 
in  it.  When  at  last  he  was  slain,  in  the  moment  of  so  changing 
his  shield,  the  Goths  did  not  cease  from  fighting.  All  that  day 
and  the  next  the  battle  continued:  on  the  third  day  the 
survivors  asked  and  received  permission  to  leave  Italy,  and 
settle  in  some  barbarian  land,  far  from  the  power  of  Rome1. 

Bat  it  took  two  years  more  to  root  out  the  isolated  Gothic 
settlements  and  garrisons  scattered  throughout  Italy,  and  this 
last  struggle  was  lengthened  by  an  intervention  in  favour  of  the 
Goths  made  by  the  Alamanni.  The  Alamanni  were  bound  by 
ancestral  ties  of  gratitude  to  Theodoric2,  and  now  they  left 
their  homes  around  the  Lake  of  Constance  to  aid  the  Goths3 
and  to  share  in  the  plunder  of  Italy.  Their  intervention 
failed :  as  so  often  later,  both  sword  and  plague  wasted  the 
German  invaders :  but  it  is  a  very  probable  conjecture  that  the 
last  remnants  of  the  Goths  accompanying  their  allies  took  refuge 
in  the  land  of  the  Alamanni.  Certainly  it  is  there  that  we  find 
some  of  the  earliest  and  most  frequent  traces  of  Gothic  saga4, 
and  it  is  probably  not  too  bold  to  regard  the  constant  occurrence 
of  the  name  Amalunc  around  the  Lake  of  Constance,  in  the 
books  of  the  Confraternities  of  St  Gall  and  Reichenau,  as  a 
trace  of  an  actual  Gothic  element  in  the  population. 

1  Procopius,  Bell.  Gott.  iv,  35;  cf.  Dahn,  n,  176-242. 

2  See  Cassiodori  Varies,  n,  41  (letter  of  Theodoric  to  Clovis  interceding 
for  the  Alamanni). 

8  See  Agathias,  n,  6-7. 

4  See  Uhland's  Essay  on  Dietrich  von  Bern  (esp.  p.  379,  note  1),  in  the 
Schriften  zur  Geschichte  der  Dichtung,  vin,  334,  etc.,  Stuttgart,  1873. 


38  Widsith 

From  these  highlands  of  South  Germany  the  story  of 
Theodoric  spread  gradually  to  the  coast  tribes  of  the  North1, 
but  as  it  passed  from  tribe  to  tribe  it  became  strangely  altered. 
For  Theodoric's  work  was,  as  we  have  seen,  undone  within  a 
lifetime,  his  countrymen  driven  out  of  the  land  he  had  won  for 
them,  and  Italy,  which  he  had  ruled  and  protected  so  well,  left 
a  prey  to  the  ferocious  Alboin  and  his  robber  dukes.  Poetry 
seized  upon  this  tragic  aspect  of  Theodoric's  career.  He  is  the 
greatest  of  warriors,  yet  fortune  always  robs  him  of  the  fruits  of 
victory  :  so  that  the  traditions  of  North  Germany  and  the  epics 
of  South  Germany  represent  the  conqueror  of  Italy  as  a  fugitive 
who  only  enters  into  his  kingdom  after  thirty  years'  exile,  after 
having  lost  all  save  one  of  his  vassals. 

So  one  of  the  most  successful  figures  in  all  history  came  to 
be  the  type  of  endurance   under  consistent   and  undeserved 
misfortune.     Dietrich's  lament  for  his  fallen  vassals  is  one  of  the 
most  pathetic  things  in  the  literature  of  the  Middle  Ages : 
Owe  daz  vor  leide  niemen  sterben  ne  mac  ! 2 

A  northern  poet  brought  together  Guthrun  and  Thiothrek 
as  the  most  sorely  tried  of  men  and  of  women : 

Never,  says  Guthrun  when  falsely  accused  to  her  husband  Atli  of 
unfaithfulness  with  Thiothrek,  Never  did  I  embrace  the  king  of  hosts, 
the  blameless  prince ;  all  other  were  our  words  as  we  two  bent  our  heads 
together,  bewailing. 

N£  ek  halsa]>a  herja  stille, 

J9for  6neisan  eino  sinne: 

a]>rar  v$ro  okrar  spekjor, 

es  vit  hgrmog  tvau  hnigom  at  runom3. 

Indeed,  so  unlike  is  the  career  of  Dietrich  von  Bern  to  that 
of  the  historic  Theodoric  that  W.  Grimm  went  so  far  as  to  deny 
their  identity4:  two  originally  quite  distinct  figures  had,  he 
thought,  been  confused.  Yet  the  transition  from  the  hero  of 
history  to  the  hero  of  story  is  quite  intelligible,  if  we  do  not 
allow  ourselves  to  forget  the  later  fortunes  of  the  Gothic  race. 

1  The  spreading  of  tradition  must  have  been  facilitated  by  the  intercom 
munication  of  mercenary  bands.    We  meet  members  of  North-Sea  coast  tribes 
serving  in  Italy  a  generation  after  Theodoric's  death  (Agathias,  i,  21). 

2  Nibelungenlied,  ed.  Bartsch,  2323. 

3  Gu\>runarkvi]>a  in,  4  (Symons,  Edda,  i,  410). 

4  Heldensage,  344.   The  mythical  theory  of  the  Dietrich  story  was  elaborated 
by  Halm,  Sagenwissenschaftliche  Studien,  Jena,  1876,  pp.  66,  etc. 


Stories  "known  to  Widsith:  Gothic  heroes  39 

It  is  true  that  popular  poetry  does  not  deal  in  the  "  abstractions 
and  generalizations  of  philosophical  world  history,"  and  to 
suppose  that  in  the  misfortunes  of  the  Theodoric  of  saga  the 
poets  consciously  sought  to  allegorize  the  subsequent  mis 
fortunes  of  his  people  is  to  misunderstand  the  spirit  of  German 
heroic  poetry,  which  did  not  work  things  out  in  this  way1.  But 
the  Gothic  stories  were  probably  in  the  first  place  carried 
beyond  the  confines  of  Italy  by  Gothic  refugees.  It  would  be 
natural  for  these  men  to  emphasize  the  tragic  side  of  Theodoric's 
story,  and,  exiles  themselves,  to  represent  their  national  hero  as 
an  exile.  Tradition  never  preserves  an  accurate  chronology, 
and  Theodoric's  many  years  of  struggle,  followed  by  thirty  years 
of  peace,  might  easily  become  thirty  years'  disaster,  followed  by 
a  few  years  of  belated  victory.  And  so  the  story  of  Dietrich 
von  Bern  might  grow  quite  naturally  from  that  of  the  historic 
Theodoric. 

On  the  other  hand,  if  the  events  of  his  life  are  distorted,  the 
character  of  the  Theodoric  of  history — just,  sometimes  stern,  on 
rare  occasions  ferocious,  is  reflected  by  later  tradition  with  con 
siderable  accuracy.  Contemporary  Roman  historians,  and  those 
of  the  next  generation,  had  every  reason  to  bear  hard  upon  the 
memory  of  the  Arian  barbarian,  at  the  overthrow  of  whose 
kingdom  they  rejoiced.  Yet  they  agree  in  representing  him  as 
one  who  loved  justice,  and  held  the  laws  sacred :  who,  though 
he  would  not  take  the  title  of  Roman  Emperor,  and  was  content 
to  be  called  reiks  as  the  Barbarians  call  their  chiefs,  was  second 
to  none  of  the  best  in  the  line  of  Emperors — a  terror  to  his 
foes,  loved  and  regretted  by  his  subjects,  Goths  and  Italians 
alike 2. 

The  main  features  of  Dietrich  von  Bern  are  here. 

To  a  certain  extent  we  can  trace  the  development  of  the 
historic  Theodoric  into  Dietrich  von  Bern.  The  earliest 
tradition  must  have  followed  fact  in  representing  Odoacer  as 

1  Compare  W.  Muller,  Myth.  183,  "  In  der  Sage  bekam  das  Andenken  an 
die  letzten  Geschicke  der  Goten  natiirlich  das  Ubergewicht...."    Against  this  it 
is  urged  by  Jiriczek(2)  130,  "mit  allgemeinen  blassen  Abstractionen  operiert 
die  Sagenbildung  nicht."     Jiriczek  is  undoubtedly  right:  yet  national  history 
must  unconsciously  colour  national  tradition. 

2  Procopius,  Bell.  Gott.  i,  1. 


40  Widsith 

Theodoric's  adversary.  A  record  of  this  stage  of  the  story  is 
preserved  in  the  Hildebrand  Lay.  "He  (Hildebrand)  fled 
from  the  enmity  of  Odoacer  with  Theodoric,  and  his  warriors 
many1."  But  tradition  tends  to  make  all  its  heroes  contempo 
rary,  and  so  Theodoric  became  the  nephew  of  the  tyrant  king 
Ermanaric,  whilst  Odoacer  first  remained  in  the  background  as 
the  instigator  of  trouble2  and  finally  disappeared  altogether. 
Sifeca,  Sifka  or  Sibech,  the  evil  genius  of  Ermanaric  in  the 
murder  of  the  Harlungs,  is  made  responsible  for  Ermanaric's 
cruelty  to  Theodoric  also. 

Theodric  in  Widsith. 

The  author  of  Deor,  to  judge  from  the  way  in  which  he 
introduces  their  names,  knew  of  Eormanric  as  the  foe  of 
Theodric.  On  the  other  hand,  it  has  come  to  be  a  dogma  that 
Theodoric  of  Verona  is  unknown  to  Widsith,  and  that  the 
Theodric  who  is  twice  mentioned  in  the  poem,  first  in  the 
catalogue  of  kings,  and  then  among  the  champions  of 
Ermanaric,  is  that  Theodoric  the  Frank,  the  son  of  Chlodowech, 
who  grew  to  be  a  hero  of  story  second  only  to  Dietrich  von 
Bern. 

This  Theodoric  the  Frank  was  an  illegitimate  son :  there 
were  difficulties  about  the  succession  and  quarrels  with  his 
kin,  followed  by  a  victorious  reign8.  Not  dissimilar  was  the 
history  of  Theodebert  his  son4.  From  these  events  grew  the 
great  Middle  High  German  stories  of  Hug-Dietrich  and  his 
son  Wolf-Dietrich,  stories  which  turn  upon  the  reproach  of 
illegitimate  birth  attaching  to  Wolf-Dietrich,  the  jealousy  of  his 
half-brothers,  stirred  up  by  the  wicked  Sabene,  the  allegiance 
of  the  faithful  Berchtung  and  his  sons :  Sabene  and  Berchtung 
being  contrasted  much  as  are  the  false  Sibech  and  the  true 
Ekkehart  in  the  story  of  the  Harlungs. 

1  floh  her  Otachres  nid, 
hina  miti  Theotrlhhe,  enti  sinero  degano  filu. 

See  Koegel  Ltg.  i,  1,  216. 

2  As  in  the    Wurzburg   Chronicle.     Yet  perhaps   this  reflects   a  confused 
tradition.     On  the  other  hand  it  is  conceivable  that,  in  the  Hildebrand  Lay, 
Odoacer  is  not  the  tyrant,  hut  the  tyrant's  counsellor. 

3  See  below,  Chap,  iii :  Theodoric  the  Frank. 

4  For  Theodebert  see  Agathias,  i,  4 ;  Gregory  of  Tours,  Hist.  Franc. ,  passim. 


Stories  known  to  Widsith:  Gothic  heroes  41 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  in  Widsith  1.  24  (\Jeodric 
weold  Froncum)  the  reference  is  to  Theodoric  the  Frank,  the  son 
of  Chlodowech.  It  has  been  too  readily  assumed  that  the 
later  allusion  to  a  Theodoric  in  1. 115  refers  also  to  the  Frankish 
king,  and  that  Theodoric  the  Goth  is  left  without  mention  in 
Widsith1'  from  which  it  has  been  argued  that  Theodoric's 
connection  with  the  Ermanaric  story  is  later,  and  dates  from 
the  eighth  century.  Yet  the  assumption  that  the  Theodric  of 
1.  24  is  identical  with  the  Theodric  of  1.  115  is  a  perilous  one. 
The  first  mentioned  Theodric  is  king  of  the  Franks ;  the  latter 
Theodric  is  a  champion  at  the  court  of  Eormanric.  Besides,  it 
is  dangerous  to  argue  from  one  section  of  Widsith  to  the  other: 
the  two  sections  may  have  been  originally  independent  poems2. 
The  only  reason  for  identifying  the  Theodric  of  1.  115  with 
Hug-Dietrich  or  Wolf-Dietrich  is  the  fact  that  his  name  is 
coupled  with  that  of  Seafola,  in  whom  Miillenhoff  saw  the  Old 
English  equivalent  of  the  treacherous  Sabene  of  Middle  High 
German  story.  But  it  was  overlooked  that  there  are  two  heroes 
of  the  name  Sabene :  the  one  a  faithless  retainer  of  Hug- 
Dietrich,  the  other — Sabene  of  Ravenna — the  faithful  retainer 
of  Dietrich  von  Bern,  often  referred  to  in  Dietrichs  Flucht3. 
The  coupling  of  Seafola  with  Theodric  is  then  equally 
appropriate,  whether  that  Theodric  be  the  Goth  or  the 
Frank,  and  gives  no  evidence  as  to  which  of  the  two  heroes  the 
poet  had  in  mind.  But  the  balance  of  probability  is  in  favour 
of  the  Ostrogoth,  for  several  reasons : 

(1)  Tradition   would   easily   make    Ermanaric's    kinsman 
Theodoric  into  one  of  his  retainers,  and  we  know  that  it  ulti 
mately  did  so :  but  no  satisfactory  explanation  has  been  given 
which  would  account  for  the  mention  of  Theodoric  the  Frank 
among  Ermanaric's  household4. 

(2)  The  omission  of  the  name  of  Theodoric  the  Ostrogoth 
from  a  list  of  Gothic  champions  would  in  any  case  be  strange. 

1  Koegel,  Ltg.  i,  1,  149-51;  Symons  in  Pauls  Grdr.^)  in,  691;  JiriczekyTi. 

2  I  hope  to  show  below  (Chap,  iv :  end),  that  they  almost  certainly  were. 

3  Dietrichs  Flucht  is  a  late  poem :    but  Sabene's  name  probably  represents 
an  early  tradition ;  for  after  the  name  had  become  current  as  that  of  a  traitor 
it  would  hardly  have  been  chosen  by  a  poet  adding  new  characters  to  his  story, 
for  a  faithful  retainer. 

4  See  note  to  1.  115. 


42  Widsith 

(3)  Although  the  Angles  certainly  knew  something  of  the 
conquests  of  Theodoric  the  Frank,  we  have  no  evidence  that 
the  romantic  story  of  Hug-Dietrich,  Wolf-Dietrich  and  Sabene 
ever  became  a  part  of  the  Anglian  stock  of  tales.  The  stories 
of  Theodoric  the  Ostrogoth,  however,  did  form  part  of  this 
stock. 

For  there  is  sufficient  evidence  that  Theodoric  the  Ostrogoth 
was  known,  and  well  known,  to  the  Anglian  poets.  "  Theodric 
held  for  thirty  winters  the  city  of  the  Maerings:  to  many 
was  that  known"  says  Deor. 

The  reference  is  obscure:  we  should  expect  rather  "was 
exiled  from "  than  "  held " :  but  the  very  allusiveness  of  the 
poet  seems  to  show  that  he  expected  his  hearers  to  know  the 
story  well.  In  the  Waldere  fragment1  we  have  another 
reference  to  Theodric,  this  time  in  the  character  which  he  plays 
so  largely  both  in  High  and  Low  German  story  :  that  of  the  foe 
of  monsters  and  giants.  A  speaker,  probably  Guthhere,  is 
referring  to  a  famous  sword,  perhaps  "Mimming": 

I  wot  that  Theodric  thought  to  send  it  to  Widia  himself,  together 
with  much  treasure... forasmuch  as  Widia,  the  son  of  Weland,  kinsman 
of  Nithhad,  released  him  from  sore  straits :  through  the  domain  of  the 
giants  he  hastened  forth. 

In  the  Anglo-Saxon  Martyrology  we  are  told  how  Theodericus 
was  hurled  to  torment  down  a  crater  of  the  Lipari  Isles — a  story 
which  is  doubtless  due  to  ecclesiastical  hatred  of  Theodoric 
as  an  Arian  heretic,  the  slayer  of  Boethius,  and  as  a  hero  of 
secular  song :  the  same  hatred  to  which  we  owe  the  conclusion 
of  the  Thidreks  saga,  where  the  Fiend,  in  the  form  of  a  black 
horse,  runs  off  with  Thithrek.  When  the  Anglo-Saxon  compiler 
adds  \cet  wees  Theodoricus  se  cyning  ]>one  we  nemnaft  ipeodric*, 
this  seems  conclusive  evidence  for  the  existence  of  vernacular 
traditions  respecting  Theodoric  in  England  at  the  date  when 
the  Martyrology  was  written ;  that  is  to  say  the  ninth 
century. 

1  The  evidence  of  this  would  of  course  be  worthless  if,  as  Koegel  (Ltg.  i,  1, 
235-41)  and  Binz  (P.B.B.  xx,  217)  suppose,  the  Waldere  is  merely  a  literal 
transliteration  from  the  O.H.G.    But  Binz  himself  has  shown  how  insufficient 
is  the  evidence  brought  forward  by  Koegel  to  support  this  theory. 

2  Old  English  Martyrology,  ed.  Herzfeld,  E.E.T.S.,  p.  84. 


Stories  known  to  Widsith:  Gothic  heroes  43 

It  has  further  been  pointed  out1  that  Ida  of  Bernicia  named 
two  of  his  sons  Theodric  and  Theodhere :  Theodhere  (Diether) 
was,  in  story,  the  name  of  Theodric's  young  brother,  whose 
premature  death  at  the  hands  of  Theodric's  former  friend  and 
follower,  Widia  (Wittich),  was  the  most  cruel  of  the  blows  which 
fell  upon  Dietrich  von  Bern.  Perhaps  this  combination  of 
names  in  the  Northumbrian  genealogy  is  a  mere  coincidence : 
if  Ida  had  the  story  in  mind  in  naming  his  sons  it  must  have 
spread  north  very  early ;  for  Ida  was  ruling  in  Bernicia  barely 
a  generation  after  the  death  of  Theodoric  the  Great,  and  some 
years  before  the  last  of  the  Ostrogoths  were  expelled  from 
Italy. 

But  other  personal  names  seem  to  confirm  a  knowledge  of 
the  Theodric  story  in  England2,  and  when  we  find  the  informa 
tion  volunteered  in  the  Alfredian  translation  of  Boethius,  se 
peodric  wees  Amulinga,  we  can  hardly  hesitate  to  attribute  this 
to  epic  tradition.  Add  the  fact  that  Theodric's  henchmen,  the 
Wylfingas — the  Wiilfinge  of  High  German  tradition — are  also 
well  known  in  English  story3,  and  it  seems  ultra-scepticism 
to  doubt,  as  does  Binz4,  that  the  mighty  figure  of  Theodoric 
played  a  considerable  part  in  the  Anglian  lays.  Indeed  the 
evidence  for  the  popularity  of  Theodoric  the  Goth  is  far  better 
than  the  evidence  for  the  popularity  of  Beowulf  the  Geat. 
For  a  passing  allusion,  which  the  poet  evidently  expects  his 
readers  to  understand,  is  better  evidence  of  popularity  than  a 
story  told  at  full  length :  and  we  have  not  one  allusion  only, 
but  several. 

When  then,  in  Widsith,  we  find  the  name  Theodric  in 
a  place  where  Theodoric  the  Goth  is  wanted,  and  where 

1  Brandl  in  Pauls  Grdr.($  n,  1,  953.    It  is  so  natural  for  kinsmen  to  bear 
names  containing  the  same  element  that  this  may  well  be  a  mere  coincidence. 

2  Lib.  Vitae,  ed.  Sweet  in  Oldest  Eng.  Texts,  p.  159,  line  212.     A  collection 
of  the  early  allusions  to  Theodoric  in  England  will  be  found  in  Miillenhoff  s 
Zeugnisse  u.  Excurse,  v,  1,  in  the  Z.f.d.A.  xn,  261-2.     Miillenhoff  notes  the 
occurrence  of  the  name  Omolincg,  Omulung  in  two  very  early  charters. 

The  signatures  are  respectively  of  the  years  692  and  706,  or  perhaps  some 
years  later,  for  the  name  occurs  in  the  endorsement  (see  Birch  i,  76  and  116). 
The  signatory  Omolincg,  Omulung  is  clearly  one  and  the  same,  the  abbot 
of  some  monastery  presumably  in  the  district  of  Worcester.  It  is  conceivable 
that  Omulung  is  a  foreign  cleric,  an  immigrant  from  the  great  abbeys  of 
St  Gall  or  Beichenau,  where  we  know  the  name  to  have  been  common. 

3  See  note  to  1.  29.  *  P.B.B.  xx,  212-214. 


44  Widsith 

Theodoric  the  Frank  would  be  a  most  unwelcome  intruder, 
there  is  surely  no  reason  why  we  should  abstain  from  the 
obvious  interpretation  of  Seafola  ond  Ipeodric  as  Theodoric  the 
Goth  and  his  retainer  Sabene  of  Ravenna1. 

Whether  Anglian  story  at  this  date  represented  Ermanaric 
as  the  relentless  foe  of  Theodoric  is  another  question.  Probably 
not :  for  since  in  Widsith  Ermanaric  is  not  yet  thought  of  as 
ruler  of  Italy,  but  governs  the  Goths  in  their  old  home  by  the 
Vistula,  there  is  no  reason  why  Theodoric's  invasion  of  Italy 
should  be  regarded  as  directed  against  him.  In  Deor  the 
mention  of  the  tyranny  of  Eormanric  immediately  after  the 
reference  to  Theodric  probably  points  to  a  connection  in  story 
between  the  two :  but  of  this  we  cannot  be  certain. 


Attila. 
j?Etla  weold  Hunum. 

No  very  considerable  lapse  of  time  would  be  needed  before 
tradition  brought  together  Ermanaric  and  Theodoric  as  con 
temporaries.  For  the  intervening  years  had  been  a  blank  in  the 
history  of  the  East-Goths ;  years  spent  in  the  service  of  their 
Hunnish  overlords ;  and  the  great  deeds  which  had  been 
achieved  during  this  time  had  gone  to  the  credit,  not  of  the 
Gothic  name,  but  of  Attila,  king  of  the  Huns. 

Two  distinct  traditions  concerning  Attila  can  be  traced 
among  the  German  races.  On  the  one  hand  South  German 
tradition  represents  him  as  a  great  and  hospitable  king,  the 
holder  of  a  court  frequented  by  valiant  knights.  Like  Arthur 
in  a  similar  position,  he  is  overshadowed  by  his  knights  and  by 
his  queen,  till  he  becomes  a  commonplace,  and  sometimes  a 

1  See  Heinzel,  Osgotische  Heldensage,  8.  Heinzel  has  noticed  the  double 
occurrence  of  Sabene:  he  and  Holthausen  (Beowulf,  p.  125)  are,  I  believe,  the 
only  critics  who  interpret  the  peodric  of  1.  115  as  Theodoric  of  Verona.  At  an 
earlier  date  (Hervararsaga  in  W.S.B.  cxiv,  50)  Heinzel  had  given  his  adhesion 
to  the  common  belief  that  the  reference  was  to  Hug-  or  Wolf-Dietrich.  Of 
course,  if  the  hypothesis  of  Bugge  (H.D.  71,  167-8;  P.B.B.  xxxv,  267)  and 
Miiller  (202)  is  correct,  that  Wolf-Dietrich  and  Sabene  are  originally  figures  of 
Ostrogothic  tradition,  this  would  account  for  the  way  in  which  they  are 
introduced  into  Widsith.  But  this  theory  has  not  been  proved. 


Stories  known  to  Widsith:  Gothic  heroes  45 

weak  figure.  But  he  is  always  kindly  and  hospitable1.  On  the 
other  hand  there  is  the  Atli  of  Scandinavian  story,  grim, 
covetous,  terrible,  who  murders  the  Niblungs,  the  brethren  of 
his  wife,  and  perishes  at  length  through  the  vengeance  of  that 
wife. 

When  we  remember  that  in  the  great  battle  on  the  Mauriac 
plain  almost  the  whole  inland  Teutonic  world  was  ranged,  the 
one  half  as  Attila's  foes  and  the  other  half  as  his  henchmen,  we 
can  understand  how  this  double  tradition  grew  up  in  German 
lands.  To  the  Rugian,  the  Gepid,  the  Thuringian  and  the 
Eastern  Frank,  but  above  all  to  the  Ostrogoth,  Attila  would  be 
the  great  king  in  whose  hall  their  chiefs  feasted,  and  following 
whose  banners  they  had  gained  all  that  a  German  warrior  most 
loved — 

sweord  and  swatigne  helm,  swylce  eac  side  byrnan 
gerenode  readum  golde. 

To  them  Attila  would  be  indeed  the  "  little  father." 

To  the  Visigoth  on  the  other  hand,  the  Salian  Frank,  and 
the  Burgundian,  Attila  would  be  the  grasping  "tyrant  of  the 
world,  making  war  without  a  quarrel  and  thinking  any  crime 
allowed  him2."  The  Atli  of  the  North  seems  to  be  derived, 
through  various  stages  of  Low  German  saga,  from  the  point  of 
view  of  the  Salian  Franks  and  other  nations  who  fought  against 
Attila  in  the  great  battle3,  whilst  in  the  South  German  Etzel 
we  can  trace  quite  clearly  the  benevolent  overlord  of  Ostrogothic 
tradition.  Not  that  the  old  hostility  of  Goth  and  Hun  was 
forgotten  in  this  South  German  tradition4:  on  the  contrary  we 
shall  see  that  in  the  person  of  the  old  national  hero  Widigoja 
(the  Wittich  of  High  German  story,  the  Wudga  or  Widia  of 
Anglo-Saxon  tradition)  recollections  of  the  old  struggle  with 
the  Huns  in  the  days  of  Ermanaric  were  mingled  with  a  vague 
remembrance  of  the  death  of  Attila's  sons  in  the  war  of  libera 
tion  eighty  years  after  Ermanaric's  death.  But  in  Southern 
story  the  Gothic  cause  grew  to  be  identified  with  the  tyrant 

1  See  Vogt,  Z.f.d.Ph.  xxv,  414;    Koegel,  Ltg.  i,  2,  283;  Hodgkin's  Italy,  n, 
176;  Thierry,  Histoire  d' Attila,  1864,  n,  224,  etc. 

2  Jordanes,  ed.  Mommsen,  xxxvi  (187).     The  words  are  put  into  the  mouth 
of  the  Koman  envoys  at  the  Visigothic  court. 

3  Pauls  Grdr.ty  m,  700. 

4  See  Appendix  (I),  Ermanaric  as  the  foe  of  the  Huns. 


46  Widsith 

Ermanaric,  whilst  Attila,  Etzel,  was  glorified  as  the  patron  and 
helper  of  Dietrich  von  Bern — no  very  strange  part  for  him  to 
play,  when  we  remember  that  Attila  actually  was  the  leader 
and  friend  of  Theodemer,  Theodoric's  father.  So  that  in  that 
very  South  German  tradition  which  was  most  closely  in  touch 
with  Ostrogothic  story,  the  sympathy  of  the  poets  was  rather 
with  the  Huns  than  with  the  Goths.  In  Low  German 
tradition,  on  the  other  hand,  Attila  was  the  tyrant  foe :  and 
the  form  which  his  name  takes  in  Widsith — ^Etla,  not  Etla — 
points  conclusively  to  Low  German  tradition1.  In  Widsith, 
therefore,  the  struggle  between  Goth  and  Hun  is  looked  upon 
from  the  Gothic  side  :  the  scene  of  the  conflict  is  the  old  home 
of  the  Goths  by  the  Vistula,  where  ^Etla,  as  the  typical  Hunnish 
chief,  is,  despite  chronology,  opposed  to  Eormanric  and  his 
men.  Chronology  has  been  also  disregarded  in  the  list  of 
Ermanaric's  champions :  earlier  heroes  like  Eastgota  or 
Wudga  have  been  drawn  into  the  great  conflict  with  the 
Huns. 

The  tradition  of  this  conflict  has  also  been  preserved  to  us 
in  the  Icelandic :  in  the  prose  of  the  Hervarar  saga  and  in  the 
verse  lay  of  Hloth  and  Angantyr :  a  fine  poem,  but  so  allusive 
and  so  corrupt  that  without  the  help  of  the  prose  saga  we  should 
hardly  be  able  to  understand  it.  The  Hervarar  saga  is  the  life 
story  of  a  sword  "  Tyrfing,"  the  work  of  dwarfs,  which  is  fated, 
every  time  it  is  drawn,  to  be  the  death  of  a  man.  The  tale  of 
the  race  of  heroes  through  whose  hands  the  sword  passes  is 
traced  from  generation  to  generation  till  we  come  to  Angantyr, 
third  of  the  name,  who  has  inherited  the  lordship  of  the  Goths 
and  the  sword  Tyrfing  from  his  father,  the  grim  king  Heithrek. 
As  Angantyr  is  drinking  the  funeral  feast  over  his  father, 
Hloth,  a  bastard  son  of  Heithrek  by  the  daughter  of  Humli, 
king  of  the  Huns,  comes  riding  from  the  East  to  claim  one  half 
of  the  inheritance.  He  speaks  in  the  poem  : 

"  Half  will  I  have  of  all  that  Heithrek  owned — cow,  calf,  humming 
hand  mill... half  the  war  gear,  the  land,  and  the  shining  rings." 

"  The  white  shield  must  be  cloven,"  Angantyr  replies,  "  and  cruel  spear 
clash  with  spear  and  many  a  man  fall  on  the  grass,  ere  I  will  halve  mine 
inheritance  with  the  son  of  Humli,  or  divide  Tyrfing  in  twain." 

1  See  note  to  1.  18. 


Stories  Tmown  to  Widsith:  Gothic  heroes  47 

Yet  Angantyr  offers  mighty  treasures  to  Hloth,  men,  horses, 
maids,  necklaces,  silver  and  gold,  "and  the  third  part  of  the 
Gothic  folk  shalt  thou  rule  alone."  At  this  old  Gizur,  the 
foster  father  of  Angantyr,  is  wroth  and  grumbles  "  That  is  an 
offer  meet  to  be  accepted  by  the  son  of  a  bondwoman,  the  son  of 
a  bondwoman  though  born  to  a  king  "  :  and  with  this  taunt  all 
thought  of  peace  is  gone.  Humli  calls  out  the  Hunnish  host, 
from  the  boy  of  twelve  winters  and  the  foal  of  two  winters,  in 
order  to  vindicate  his  grandson's  right,  and  they  fall  upon  the 
Gothic  borders,  and  first  upon  the  amazon  sister  of  Angantyr, 
Hervor.  Hervor  is  slain,  and  Ormar  the  master  of  her  host 
comes  with  the  news  to  Angautyr,  "drenched  is  all  Gothland 
with  the  blood  of  men."  Angantyr  sends  Gizur  to  challenge 
the  Huns  to  battle  at  Dunheath ;  the  challenge  is  delivered  and 
Gizur  is  allowed  to  ride  away  in  safety,  to  tell  to  Angantyr  the 
vast  numbers  of  the  Hunnish  hordes1.  From  the  prose  saga  we 
get  a  lengthy  account  of  the  battle,  waged  for  ten  days2.  But 
the  poem  omits  all  account  of  this,  and  passes  at  once  to 
the  last  scene  of  all,  as  Angantyr  stands  over  his  dying  half- 
brother  :  "  111  is  the  doom  of  the  Fates." 

The  connection  between  this  story  and  the  Ermanaric 
catalogue  in  Widsith  was  noticed  by  C.  C.  Rafn  in  his  edition 
of  the  Hervarar  saga3  half  a  century  or  more  ago.  A  few  years 
later  another  scholar4  pointed  out  that  the  Hltye  and  Incgerityeow 
of  our  poem  were  Hloth  and  Angantyr. 

It  seems  clear  that  the  Hervarar  saga  and  the  Ermanaric 
catalogue  in  Widsith  go  back  to  a  common  tradition,  which  had  its 
roots  in  the  early  history  of  the  Huns  and  the  Goths.  Whether  we 
can  fix  any  precise  event  in  that  early  history  as  the  origin  of 
the  story  is  another  matter.  Heinzel  has  tried  to  do  this,  and 
has  drawn  attention  to  a  number  of  remarkable  parallels  between 
the  incidents  preceding  the  battle  on  the  Mauriac  plain,  and 

1  This  part  of  the  story  Saxo  knew,  and  incorporated  into  his  History  of  the 
Danes  (ed.  Holder,  154-5). 

8  Fornaldar  Sqgur,  1829,  i,  503-8.  The  Lied  von  der  Hunnemchlacht  will 
be  found  in  the  Eddica  Minora  of  Heusler  and  Banisch,  Dortmund,  1903 ;  also 
in  the  text  of  the  Hervarar  saga. 

3  In  the  Antiquity's  russes  Eafn  identified  Ormar  and  Wyrmhere :  his  other 
attempts  at  identification  (e.g.  Angantyr  and  Eastgota)  were  less  fortunate.  See 
notes  to  Wyrmhere  (1. 116)  and  Hlfye  (1.  119)  below. 

«  See-note  to  1.  116. 


48  Widsiih 

the  incidents  in  the  closing  chapter  of  the  Hervarar  saga1. 
But  in  all  probability  no  one  specific  battle  gave  rise  to  the 
tradition.  Into  the  ten  days'  battle  of  Dunheath  Norse  poetry 
has  probably  compressed  the  century  long  struggle  of  Goth  and 
Hun :  and  Widsith  is  probably  right  in  pointing  to  a  succession 
of  fights  rather  than  any  one  pitched  battle.  For  popular 
tradition  will  easily  turn  a  desultory  conflict  into  a  single 
dramatic  encounter,  but  hardly  the  reverse2. 

And  the  fact  that  in  the  Norse  story  Atli  is  not  the  leader 
of  the  Huns,  is  strong  evidence  that  the  tradition  does  not 
derive  from  Attila's  great  reverse  on  the  Mauriac  plain.  For 
to  Teutonic  tradition  Attila  is  essentially  the  Hun.  That  he 
should  be  introduced  into  Widsith  is  therefore  natural,  even 
if  the  fighting  on  the  Vistula  reflects  those  ancient  battles 
which  preceded  the  fall  of  Ermanaric,  long  before  Attila's  days. 
But  when  in  the  Hervarar  saga  we  find  that  the  Hunnish  leader 
is  not  Atli  but  Humli,  we  may  be  sure  that  this  is  an  original 
trait  of  the  story.  Attila  could  hardly  have  lost  his  place  as 
Hunnish  leader  in  the  battle  of  Dunheath,  had  he  ever  rightly 
possessed  it8. 

Wudga  and  Hama. 

Ne  woeran  ^cet  gestya  ]>a  scemestan, 
}>eak\>e  ic  hy  anihst  nemnan  sceolde... 
Wrceccan  ]>cer  weoldan  wundnan  golde, 
werum  and  wifum,    Wudga  and  Hama. 

To  two  heroes,  met  during  his  wanderings,  Wudga  and 
Hama,  our  poet  does  special  honour.  The  word  wrcecca,  which 
is  applied  to  them,  comes  later,  in  High  German,  to  signify 
simply  champion,  or  warrior.  But  in  Old  English  it  has  not 
lost  its  significance  of  "  exile ";  and  in  this  representation  of 
Wudga  and  Hama  as  strangers  within  the  Gothic  borders  we 
have  perhaps  an  indication  that,  at  the  time  when  Widsith  was 

1  Hervararsaga,    esp.    pp.   50,   etc.     Heinzel's    theory   is    discussed    and 
rejected   by  Veselovsky   in   the   Bussian  Journal  of   the  Ministry  of  Public 
Instruction,    May,    1888,    pp.   74-90,    "Short    notes   on    the    Byliny."      See 
summary  by  V.   Jagic"   in  the  Archiv  fur  Slavische  Philologie,  Berlin,  1888, 
xi,  307. 

2  See  Jagtf,  p.  308. 

8  For  reasons  to  the  contrary  see,  however,  Heinzel,  Hervararsaga  in  W.S.B. 
cxiv,  79. 


Stories  known  to  Widsith:  Gothic  heroes  49 

written,  it  was  still  felt  that  they  did  not  rightly  belong  to  the 
Ermanaric  cycle :  much  as  Sir  Tristram,  though  he  visits  the 
court  of  Arthur  and  is  enrolled  a  knight  of  the  Table  Round,  is 
never  quite  at  his  ease  there,  but  betrays  that  he  has  stepped 
out  of  a  story  originally  distinct.  It  is  probable  however  that 
wrceccan  means  more  than  this,  and  that  in  the  stories  known 
to  Widsith,  Wudga  and  Hama  were  outlaws. 

Wudga  is  probably  a  more  ancient  figure  of  Gothic  tradition 
than  even  Ermanaric. 

Vidigoia1  is  mentioned  by  Jordanes  as  one  of  the  Gothic 
heroes  whose  memories  were  preserved  in  popular  song3:  in  a 
later  chapter  a  locality  is  mentioned  "  where  of  old  Vidigoia, 
the  bravest  of  the  Goths,  fell  by  the  wiles  of  the  Sarmatians3." 
In  the  course  of  generations  the  Huns,  as  the  historic  foes  of 
the  Goths,  naturally  took  the  place  of  the  Sarmatians,  whilst 
Widigauja  came  to  be  drawn  into  the  cycle  of  two  distinct 
Gothic  kings,  whose  fame  eclipsed  his  own.  As  the  foe  of  the 
Huns  he  was  naturally  connected  with  Ermanaric4,  whilst  tales 
of  adventures  with  giants  and  monsters  made  him  the  associate 
of  Theodoric.  These  tales  are  preserved  both  in  the  Middle 
High  German  and  in  the  Thidreks  Saga:  we  have  seen  that 
the  Old  English  Waldere  alludes  to  the  reward  Widia  received 
for  releasing  Theodric  from  straits,  presumably  among  the 
giants  and  monsters.  Thus  Widigauja,  Wittich,  owes  fealty 
to  two  kings  ;  and  when  later  tradition  made  these  kings  deadly 
foes,  his  position  became  a  difficult  one.  True,  story  represented 
him  as  having  entered  the  service  of  Ermanaric,  with  the  con 
sent  of  his  former  lord,  Theodoric,  before  their  quarrel5.  But, 

1  Corresponding  to  a  presumed  Gothic  *  Widigauja. 

2  Ante  quos  etiam  cantu  maiorum  facta  modulationibus  citharisque  canebant, 
Eterpamara,  Hanale,  Fridigerni,  Vidigoia  et   aliorum,  quorum  in  hac  gente 
magna  opinio  est,  quales  vix  heroas  fuisse  miranda  iactat  antiquitas.     Cap.  v 
(43)  ed.  Mommsen. 

3  ingentia  si  quidem  flumina,  id  est  Tisia,  Tibisiaque  et  Dricca,  transientes 
venimus  in  loco  illo  ubi  dudum  Vidigoia  Gothorum  fortissimus  Sarmatum  dolo 
occubuit ;  indeque  non  longe  ad  vicum,  in  quo  rex  Attlla  morabatur,  accessimus. 
xxxiv,  (178).     The  spot  is  probably  in  the  centre  of   what   is   now   Hungary. 
The  rivers  mentioned  are  not  easy  to  identify,  but  one  of  them  is  apparently 
the  Theiss.     See  Wietersheim,  Geschichte  der  Volkerwanderung ,  2  Aufl.  herausg. 
Dahn,  n,  230-31. 

4  See  Miillenhoff,  Z.f.d.A.  xn,  256. 

6  Alpharts  Tod,  26;  cf.  Jiriczek(2)  307. 

c.  4 


50  Widsith 

even  so,  his  honour  was  not,  in  the  High  German  versions, 
saved,  and  Vidigoia  Gothorum  fortissimus  becomes  "  Wittich 
the  untrue1." 

One  of  the  worst  checks  received  by  the  historic  Theodoric 
in  the  long  struggle  which  made  him  master  of  Italy  was  due 
to  his  having  first  received  into  his  service,  and  having  then 
been  deserted  by,  a  general  of  his  adversary's,  Tufa.  Perhaps 
this  double  treason  came  to  be  ascribed  to  Wittich2.  Even  his 
valiant  deeds  against  the  old  enemies,  the  Huns,  stood  Wittich 
in  little  stead.  The  legend  which  made  him  the  slayer  of  the 
sons  of  Attila  is  probably,  as  Heinzel  has  pointed  out,  an  echo 
of  the  two  great  battles  in  which  the  Goths  threw  off  the  yoke 
of  the  Huns,  defeated  the  sons  of  Attila,  and  slew  one  of  them  ; 
the  battle  of  the  river  Nedao  in  the  year  454 3,  and  the  subse 
quent  and  final  victory,  probably  of  the  same  year.  The  historic 
victors  in  these  battles  were  the  father  and  uncles  of  Theodoric, 
but,  as  the  national  champion  against  the  Huns,  it  was  im 
possible  to  keep  Widigauja  out  of  the  business.  When,  however, 
later  story  made  Attila  Theodoric's  refuge  from  the  treachery 
of  his  uncle  Ermanaric,  the  slaying  of  the  children  of  Attila 
became  one  of  the  worst  of  the  many  evil  acts  of  Wittich. 
But  only  one  out  of  many  ;  for  Wittich  came  to  be  a  sinister 
figure :  the  merciless  slayer  of  youthful  princes.  The  death  of 
one  of  these,  Nuodunc,  is  referred  to  several  times  in  the 
Nibelungen  Lied:  it  is  one  of  the  old  sorrows  lying  in  the 
background,  when  the  Burgundians  are  hospitably  entertained 

1  da  ndmen  si  den  ende 

von  des  ungetriuwen  Witegen  hende. 

Rabenschlacht,  stanza  364. 

2  Dietrichs  Flucht,  7133  etc.,  7712  etc.,  cf.  Max  Eieger  in  Z.f.dM.  i,  233. 
The  connection  between  the  treason  of  Wittich  and  that  of  the  historic  Tufa  is 
often  spoken  of  as  certain  (e.g.  by  Jiriczekfj)  133  ;  (2)  136).   But  there  are  serious 
difficulties :  cf.  Boer,  Ermanarich,  88 ;  Miiller,  160.     Apparently  it  is  only  in 
the  latest  versions  of  his  story  that  Wittich  becomes  a  traitor.   We  should  have 
to  assume,  either  that  a  tradition  of  Tufa's  treachery  survived  independently 
to  a  late  date,  and  was  transferred  to  Wittich  after  his  degradation  ;  or  that, 
under  learned  influence,  the  historic  fact  of  Tufa's  treachery  was  attributed  to 
the  traditional  Wittich,  by  some  such  combination  of  history  and  legend  as 
has  been  suggested  for  the  old  French  epic  by  Be'dier  (Les  legendes  epiques, 
108  etc.,  399  etc.). 

The  connection  sometimes  suggested  with  the  historic  Witigis  (e.g.  by 
Abeling,  Das  Nibelungenlied,  1907,  p.  221;  Matthaei  in  Z.f.d.A,  ZLVI,  51  etc.) 
eeems  very  doubtful. 

3  Hodgkin's  Italy,  n,  192;  ra,  14. 


Stories  known  to  Widsith:  Gothic  heroes  51 

by  the  Margrave  Riidiger1  and  his  lady.  But  the  story  is  not 
told  at  length  in  any  extant  High  German  poem :  for  in  High 
German  story  the  place  of  Nuodunc  was  taken  by  the  young 
Alphart,  whom  Wittich  does  to  death  with  the  help  of  his 
friend  Heime,  and  that  too  by  a  foul  stroke2.  As  well  as 
Nuodunc,  Alphart  and  the  sons  of  Attila,  Wittich  slays  the 
young  brother  of  Dietrich,  Diether  der  vurste  wolgetdn3.  But 
vengeance  is  at  hand  in  the  person  of  Dietrich  himself.  He 
gives  chase  to  Wittich,  whom  neither  taunts,  nor  the  example 
of  his  uncle  Reinolt,  can  persuade  to  stand  his  ground.  But 
Dietrich  gains  on  him,  and  the  sea  is  in  front.  Wittich  has 
already  rushed  into  the  sea  when  "at  that  moment  came  a 
mermaid.... She  took  the  mighty  warrior,  and  carried  him  with 
her,  horse  and  all... with  her,  down  to  the  bottom  of  the  sea4." 

It  is  unusual  for  the  god  in  the  machine  to  appear  in  order 
to  save  the  traitor  from  the  vengeance  of  the  hero :  and  may 
we  not  safely  see  in  Wittich's  end  a  survival  from  the  story  of 
the  valiant  champion  of  earlier  date5? 

We  have  no  reason  to  think  that  degradation  overtook 
Wudga  in  any  of  the  English  stories:  for  even  the  conti 
nental  Saxon  versions,  as  translated  in  the  Thidreks  saga,  kept 
his  honour  unimpaired.  In  the  Thidreks  saga  Vithga  passes, 
with  Thithrek's  consent,  into  the  service  of  Erminrek,  whilst 
these  heroes  are  yet  friends.  He  warns  his  old  master  of  the 
evil  which  is  compassed  against  him  by  Sifka's  wiles :  but  when 
Thithrek  tries  to  regain  his  own  by  force  Vithga  has,  against 
his  will8,  to  bring  up  his  liegemen  to  fight  under  Erminrek's 
banners.  Deserted  by  Sifka,  he  rallies  the  host,  slays  first 
Nauthung,  then  the  sons  of  Attila,  and  at  last,  after  warning 
him  in  vain,  Thithrek's  young  brother;  and  falls  a  victim  to 
Thithrek's  revenge.  The  interest  to  the  Saxon  poet  lay  in  the 

1  Der  Nibelunge  Not,  ed.  Bartsch,  1699:   cf.  also  1903,  1906,  1927.     For 
other  references  see  Grimm,  H.S.  101  (third  edit.  112). 

2  Alpharts  Tod,  289.    The  version  is  confused,  fragmentary  and  interpolated. 

3  Rabenschlacht,  stanza  453,  etc. 

4  Eabenschlacht,  stanza  964-5 ;  cf.  966-974. 

5  As  is  noted  by  Grimm,  H.S.  360  (third  edit.  408)  there  are  noble  features 
even  about  the  High  German  Wittich,  such  as  his  lament  after  he  has  smitten 
Diether. 

6  Cap.  323. 

4—2 


52  Widsith 

story  of  the  good  knight  compelled  to  fight  those  who  are  dear 
to  him ;  the  pathos  is  that  of  the  Margrave  Eiidiger,  in  the 
Nibelungen  Lied,  or  of  the  closing  chapters  of  Mallory,  where 
Lancelot  and  his  men  wage  war  against  King  Arthur.  This 
feeling  receives  fine  expression  in  the  preceding  scene,  where 
the  old  friends,  Master  Hildebrand  and  Reinald,  meet  in  the 
moonlight  by  the  river  between  the  two  hosts:  "Then  said 
Hildebrand,  '  Where  is  Vithga,  our  beloved  friend,  with  his 
host  ? '  Then  Reinald  answered,  '  You  can  see  the  green  tent, 
with  the  silver  knob  on  the  top  of  the  pole.  There  Vithga 
sleeps,  and  many  Amlungs.  And  they  have  vowed  that  to 
morrow  they  will  cleave  many  a  helm1.'" 

"  In  Witege  and  Heime  later  heroic  story  has  personified, 
in  duplicate,  the  faithless,  venal,  cold-hearted  and  sinister 
champion2."  We  have  seen  that,  with  regard  to  Witege,  this 
must  be  understood  with  limitations :  and  equally  is  this  the 
case  with  regard  to  Heime. 

There  is  no  historical  incident  with  which  we  can  associate 
Hama's  name.  The  earliest  references  are  in  Widsith,  where 
Hama  is  Wudga's  comrade ;  the  already  mentioned  St  Gall 
document  of  786,  in  which  a  Heimo  and  his  daughter  Suanailta 
occur ;  and  the  puzzling  passage  in  Beowulf: 

sy)>tSan  Hama  aetwaeg 

to  )>sere  byrhtan  byrig  Brosinga  mene, 

sigle  and  sincfset,  searoniSas  fealh  [Grundtvig,  Leo,  fleah] 

Eormenrices,  geceas  ecne  rsed. 

Since  Hama  carried  off  to  the  bright  town  the  necklace  of  the  Brisings, 
jewel  and  precious  work :  penetrated  [better,  fled]  the  wiles  of  Ermanaric, 
chose  the  eternal  welfare3. 

1  Cap.  326.     Vithga  overshadows  his  master,  and  is  the  real  hero  of  much 
of  the   Thidreks  saga,  as  Launcelot   of  the  Morte  Arthur.    Vithga  takes  a 
robbers'  castle  which  has  defied  Thithrek  (cap.  84),  and  it  is  only  by  borrowing 
Vithga's   sword   Mimung  that   Thithrek  is   able   to  accomplish  his  greatest 
triumph,  and  vanquish  Sigurd  (cap.  222). 

2  Symons  in  Paul's  Grdr.y)  in,  694. 

3  Bugge  (P.B.B.  xii,  70)  takes  geceas  ecne  reed  to  be  a  reference  to  Heime's 
retirement  to  the  monastery.   But  this,  though  a  motive  common  enough  in  the 
later  romances,  seems  out  of  place  in  Beowulf.    It  is  much  more  probable  that 
it   means   "he  died"   (Mull,   in  Z.f.d.A.   xn,   304).     It  is  possible  that   the 
retirement  into  the  monastery  which  we  find  in  the  Thidreks  saga  is  a  weaken 
ing  of  some  more  tragic  end  in  the  earlier  story,  just  as  the  vengeance  which 
Dietrich  works  upon  Elsan   (Rabenschlacht,  stanza  1120)   is  ultimately  com 
muted  into  retirement  to  a  monastery.     Cf.  Jiriczek(2)  318.     Or  does  the  phrase 
simply  mean  c '  he  did  right  "  (in  harrying  Ermanaric)  ? 


Stories  knoivn  to  Widsith:  Gothic  heroes  53 

From  these  last  documents  Mlillenhoff  hazarded  the  guess 
that  Hama  was  the  name  of  the  treacherous  retainer  whose 
desertion  of  Ermanaric  is  recorded  by  Jordanes,  and  that  the 
fraudulentus  discessus  was  the  robbing  Ermanaric  of  his 
treasure1.  This  seems  improbable.  The  evidence  of  the 
charter,  far  from  supporting  it,  is  against  it.  Is  it  likely  that 
a  man  named  Heimo,  if  this  had  been  the  name  of  the  legendary 
chief  who  did  the  deed,  and  left  his  wife  to  bear  the  punish 
ment,  would  have  given  to  his  daughter  the  name  of  that 
hapless  wife  ? 

It  has  generally  been  assumed  that  the  reference  to  Hama 
in  Widsith  points  to  him  as  still  a  retainer  of  Eormanric.  But 
the  passage  needs  careful  examination.  Widsith  travels  through 
the  land  of  the  Goths  and  visits  the  company  of  Eormanric : 
then  follows  a  long  list  of  names,  concluding  with  a  reference 
to  combats  with  the  people  of  Attila.  Then  comes  a  second 
list  of  names,  and  it  is  in  this  second  list  that  the  names  of 
Wudga  and  Hama  occur.  Of  them  it  is  said  that  as  exiles 
(wrceccan)  they  ruled  by  means  of  twisted  gold  over  men  and 
women. 

Now  a  comparison  of  the  more  than  twenty  places  in  which 
the  word  wrcecca  occurs  in  Old  English  poetry  shows  it  to  have 
a  distinct  and  emphatic  meaning :  "  exile,"  "  outlaw,"  even 
"  outcast."  Of  course  Wudga  and  Hama  may  be  outlaws  who 
have  taken  refuge  at  the  court  of  Eormanric,  as  suggested 
above :  but  this  is  not  the  most  obvious  interpretation  of  the 
lines,  nor  does  it  explain  why  the  group  to  which  Wudga  and 
Hama  belong  should  form  a  separate  list  distinct  from  the 
other  followers  of  Eormanric.  It  seems  more  natural  to  read 
the  passage  thus : — the  poet  traverses  the  Gothic  land,  visiting 
first  of  all  the  court  of  Eormanric;  then,  after  leaving  that 
court,  he  visits  (still  in  or  near  the  Gothic  land)  other  heroes, 
imagined  as  dwelling  in  exile  on  the  outskirts  of  the  kingdom 
of  Eormanric.  This  interpretation  derives  some  support  from 
the  phrase  used  of  Wudga  and  Hama :  "  they  ruled  there  by 
means  of  twisted  gold  over  men  and  women."  To  rule  by 
means  of  gold,  to  give  gold,  is  in  Old  Germanic  poetry  the 
1  Z.E.  xin  in  Z.f.d.A.  xn,  302-6. 


54  Widsith 

peculiar  prerogative  of  the  independent  or  semi-independent 
chief.     It  is  a  phrase  hardly  appropriate  to  a  retainer. 

Turning  to  the  Thidreks  saga  we  find  Heimir  essentially 
an  outlaw  champion.  Whilst  still  a  lad,  he  takes  service  with 
Thithrek ;  but  he  is  exiled  for  a  fault.  He  lives  as  a  robber 
and,  once  at  least,  has  to  save  himself  by  flight.  "  Then  did 
Heimir  say  that  which  many  men  have  since  found  to  be  true, 
that  no  iron  is  so  true  to  its  lord  as  is  the  spur1."  At  length 
Thithrek  pardons  him,  and  he  returns  to  his  allegiance.  But 
he  plays  only  a  subordinate  part  till  the  time  comes  when 
Thithrek  himself  is  exiled,  when  Heimir  denounces  Erminrek 
to  his  face,  escapes,  thanks  to  Vithga's  timely  aid,  from  pursuit, 
and  lives  thenceforth  as  an  outlaw,  harrying  Erminrek's  land2. 
It  is  to  be  noted  that  he  is  not  represented  as  accompanying 
Thithrek  in  his  exile,  and  he  takes  no  part  in  Thithrek's 
subsequent  attempts  to  win  back  his  own  by  force.  He  lives 
his  outlaw  life  for  twenty  or  thirty  years,  burning  and  slaying 
by  day  and  by  night,  till  at  length  he  repents  of  the  evil, 
and  enters  a  monastery.  Here  Thithrek  finds  him,  after  all 
his  other  knights  have  been  lost,  and  a  fine  scene  ensues 
between  the  two  grey-headed  men,  as  Thithrek  slowly  breaks 
down  Heimir's  resolve,  and  draws  him  forth  again  into  the 
world3. 

Our  sources  are,  then,  consistent  in  the  view  they  take  of 
Hama.  In  Beowulf  he  is  a  fugitive,  possessed  of  treasure, 
robbed,  apparently,  from  Ermanaric  :  in  Widsith  he  is  an  exile, 
possessed  of  treasure,  and  standing  to  Ermanaric  in  some 
relation  no  further  defined:  in  the  Thidreks  saga  he  is  an 
outlaw,  and  gains  treasure  by  plundering  Erminrek's  land. 

From  these  references  one  critic4  has  argued  that  Wudga 
and  Hama  were  originally  figures  connected,  not  with  Er 
manaric,  but  with  Theodoric,  friends  who  follow  him  into  exile 
when  he  flees  before  Ermanaric.  But  in  no  version  of  the  story 
are  they  so  represented :  not  in  the  High  German,  nor  in  the 
Thidreks  saga,  where  Vithga  and  Heimir,  though  friendly  to 
Thithrek,  expressly  do  not  follow  him  into  exile.  That  Heimir 

1  Cap.  116.  2  Cap.  288,  429.  »  Cap.  434. 

*  Boer,  Ermanarich,  185. 


Stories  known  to  Widsith:  Gothic  heroes  55 

especially  should  not  do  so  is  strange ;  for  Heimir  is  in  the 
Thidreks  saga  the  Bedivere  of  Thithrek's  company :  "  first  made 
and  latest  left  of  all  the  knights."  That  he  should  not  be  with 
his  master  in  his  greatest  need,  but  should  choose  to  live  as  a 
solitary  outlaw  harrying  Erminrek,  is  not  what  we  should  expect 
any  story-teller  to  invent.  Such  an  extraordinary  trait  can  only 
be  accounted  for  in  one  way :  it  must  be  part  of  an  original 
tradition  which  represented  Hama  as  thus  harrying  Ermanaric 
on  his  own  account,  and  which  probably  goes  back  to  a  period 
before  any  tradition  of  hostility  between  Ermanaric  and 
Theodoric  had  grown  up. 

And  this  is  confirmed  by  the  references  to  Hama  in  Old 
English  poetry.  In  Beowulf  there  is  no  mention  of  Theodoric  : 
this  indeed  cannot  count  for  much,  for  the  allusion  to  Kama's 
story  is  hasty,  and  no  details  are  given.  But  in  Widsith  also 
it  is  quite  clear  that  Kama's  exile  is  not  connected  with  that 
of  Theodoric.  For  the  visit  of  Widsith  to  the  land  of  the 
Goths,  in  which  he  meets  with  the  wrceccan,  Wudga  and  Hama, 
is  imagined  as  taking  place  before  the  evil  deeds  of  Eormanric 
have  occurred.  Amongst  the  household  of  Eormanric  Widsith 
meets  the  Harlung  brethren,  and  apparently  Theodoric  himself. 

The  exile  of  Hama  in  Widsith  is,  then,  independent  of  any 
quarrel  between  Eormanric  and  Theodoric.  More  probably, 
Hama  is  the  typical  outlaw  of  early  Germanic  tradition;  the 
forerunner  of  those  bandit  heroes  whom  we  meet  later  in 
Icelandic  saga  and  English  ballad.  This  would  account  for 
certain  rough  features  which  characterize  the  Heimir  of  the 
Thidreks  saga,  a  slayer  of  merchants1  and  burner  of  monasteries2, 
of  whom  it  is  said  that  "  had  he  had  never  so  much  gold  and 
silver,  the  monks  would  not  have  received  him  had  they  known 
he  was  Heimir  Studasson8."  Heimir  is  contrasted  with  the 
more  chivalrous  Vithga4:  in  the  High  German,  on  the  other 
hand,  Heime  is  more  noble  than  Wittich.  In  Alpharts  Tod 
a  clear  distinction  is  drawn  between  him  and  Wittich.  Heime 
is  placed  in  a  difficult  position,  but  that  man  must  be  indeed 
a  censorious  judge,  who,  after  reading  the  poem  through,  feels 

1  Cap._  110.  2  Cap.  435.  3  Cap.  429.  4  Cap.  87,  108,  207. 


56  Widsith 

that  his  honour  is  besmirched1.    It  is  Wittich  who,  after  Heime 
has  stepped  in  to  rescue  him,  takes  an  unfair  advantage. 

One  of  the  best  of  all  the  old  stories  told  in  the  Thidreks 
saga  is  that  of  how  Heimir  betook  himself,  in  his  old  age,  to 
the  monastery,  to  atone  for  his  sins ;  surrendering  to  the  abbot 
all  his  wealth,  his  weapons,  his  horse  and  store  of  gold  and 
silver,  but  concealing  his  name.  The  monastery  is  harried  by 
a  giant,  who  challenges  the  monks  to  fight  out  the  quarrel. 
The  monks  can  find  no  champion,  though  they  promise  a 
mansion  in  paradise  to  their  representative  in  case  of  defeat. 
Heimir  learns  the  trouble  from  his  fellow  monks  in  the  chapter 
house,  and  volunteers  to  meet  the  giant ;  rather  to  the  distress 
of  the  abbot,  who  does  not  approve  of  a  monk  of  his  being  a 
fighting  man.  Heimir  asks  for  his  weapons  back :  the  abbot 
answers  falsely  : 

"  Thou  shalt  not  have  thy  sword  :  it  was  broken  asunder  and  a  door 
hinge  made  of  it  here  in  the  monastery.  And  the  rest  of  thine  armour 
was  sold  in  the  market-place."  Then  spake  Heimir  "Ye  monks  know 
much  of  books,  but  little  of  chivalry :  had  ye  known  how  good  these 
weapons  were,  ye  had  never  parted  with  them."  And  he  sprang  towards 
the  abbot,  and  took  his  cowl  in  both  hands,  and  said  "  Verily  thou  wast 
a  fool,  if  no  iron  would  suit  thee  to  furnish  thy  church  doors,  but  my 
good  sword  Naglhring,  which  has  cut  asunder  many  a  helm,  like  cloth, 
and  made  many  a  son  of  the  giants  headless  :  and  thou  shalt  pay  for  it." 
And  he  shook  the  cowl,  with  the  head  inside,  so  hard  that  four  of  the 
abbot's  teeth  fell  out ;  three  on  to  the  floor,  and  the  fourth  down  his 
throat.  And  when  the  monks  heard  mention  of  Naglhring,  then  they 
knew  that  it  was  Heimir  Studasson,  of  whom  they  had  oft  heard  tell. 
And  they  were  sore  afraid,  and  took  the  keys,  and  went  to  the  great  chest 
where  all  his  weapons  were  stored.  One  took  his  sword  Naglhring,  the 
second  his  hauberk,  the  third  his  helm,  the  fourth  his  shield,  and  the 
fifth  his  spear.  And  all  these  weapons  had  been  so  well  stored  that 
they  were  no  whit  worse  than  when  he  parted  with  them. 

And  Heimir  took  Naglhring,  and  saw  how  fairly  its  edges  and  its 
gold  ornaments  shone :  and  it  came  into  his  mind  what  trust  he  had  had 
hrits  edges  each  time  that  he  should  fight.  And  as  he  thought  of  many 
a  happy  day,  and  how  he  had  ridden  out  with  his  fellows,  he  was  first 
red  as  blood,  and  then  pale  as  a  corpse.  And  he  kept  silence  for  a  time. 
After  that  he  asked  where  was  his  horse  Rispa.  And  the  abbot  made 
answer  "  Thy  horse  used  to  draw  stones  to  the  church  :  he  has  been  dead 
many  a  year2." 

In  this  picture  of  Hama  become  a  monk,  standing  before 
the  abbot  and  the  assembled  chapter,  dreaming  of  the  old  days 
when  he  rode  out  with  Ermanaric  and  Theodoric,  there  is 

1  Cf.  especially  stanzas  280,  287.  2  Thidreks  saga,  431. 


Stories  known  to  Widsith:  Gothic  heroes  57 

something  typical  of  the  decline  and  end  of  the  Gothic  stories. 
The  old  heroic  world  disappeared  before  the  mediaeval  church 
and  mediaeval  chivalry1. 

In  England  there  is  evidence  that  even  before  the  Norman 
conquest  the  heathen  heroes  were  being  forgotten ;  whilst  we 
can  trace  in  the  Latin  chroniclers2  indications  that  a  new  heroic 
world,  the  heroes  of  which  were  the  Christian  kings  of  England, 
was  gradually  displacing  the  old.  In  France  Charlemagne,  the 
champion  of  Christendom,  supplanted  those  older  heroes  whose 
songs  had  been  chanted  in  the  halls  of  Karl  the  Great.  In 
Scandinavian  lands,  it  is  true,  the  old  stories  survived:  but 
passing  through  the  Viking  age  they  developed  into  something 
different  in  spirit  from  the  songs  of  the  earlier  migrations. 
Still  more  was  this  the  case  in  continental  Germany.  The 
old  names  survived,  and  some  fragments  of  the  old  stories, 
but  the  spirit  that  breathed  through  them  was  different. 

1  For  the  last  English  reference  to  Wudga  and  Hama  see  Appendix  K. 

2  Especially  William  of  Malmesbury,  and,  to  a  less  degree,  Henry  of  Hunt 
ingdon. 


58  Widsith 


Burgundian  heroes:   The  Burgundians  at  Worms. 

The  Burgundians  originally  dwelt  in  Eastern  Germany1. 
Broken,  about  the  middle  of  the  third  century,  in  a  quarrel 
with  the  Gepidae,  they  made  their  way  across  Germany  to 
the  banks  of  the  Rhine,  and  before  the  end  of  the  century 
they  were  threatening  the  Roman  frontier  from  across  the 
river:  if  we  can  believe  Orosius, — which  we  cannot — they 
had,  by  the  year  374,  so  far  recovered  from  their  early  dis 
asters  as  to  number  80,000  fighting  men2.  Shortly  after  Alaric 
and  his  Goths  had  sacked  Rome,  Gundahari,  King  of  the  Bur 
gundians,  claimed  his  share  in  the  plunder  of  the  empire  by 
setting  up  a  sham  emperor,  Jovinus.  "  Every  circumstance," 
says  Gibbon,  "  is  dark  and  extraordinary  in  the  short  history  of 
the  reign  of  Jovinus8."  The  all-powerful  Goths  seem  to  have 
supported  him.  But  he  proved  unsatisfactory,  and  we  find 
Attawulf,  the  successor  of  Alaric  in  the  leadership  of  the 
Goths,  undertaking  "if  fair  and  honourable  terms  were 
offered"  to  send  in  the  head  of  the  pretender.  We  must 
hope  that  Gundahari — "the  glorious  Gunnar" — was  no  party 
to  this  buying  and  selling  of  the  emperor  he  had  made :  but  it 
looks  suspicious  that  the  same  year  saw  the  destruction  of 
Jovinus,  and  the  apparently  peaceable  acquisition  by  the  Bur 
gundian  chief  of  the  long-coveted  territory  on  the  left  bank  of 
the  Rhine4.  So  Gundahari  ruled  at  Worms5,  ze  Wormez  df 
den  sant,  and  this  obscure  incident  of  the  puppet  emperor6 

1  See  note  to  1.  19. 

2  Orosius  vii,  32  (A.U.C.  Mcxvm,  Burgundionum  quoque,  novorum  hostium, 
novum   nomen,   qui  plusquam    octoginta  millia  (ut  ferunt)   armatorum,   ripce 
Rheni  fluminis  insederunt  (see  Migne  (1846)  xxxi,  1144).     This  is  a  misrepre 
sentation,  both  as  to  the  numbers  of  the  Burgundians  and  as  to  the  novelty  of 
their  appearance,  of  the  entry  in  Jerome's  continuation  of  the  Chronicle  of 
Eusebius,  A.D.  377  (374)  Burgundiorum  SQfenne  millia,  quot  numquam  antea,  ad 
Ehenum  descenderunt.     (Jerome  in  Migne  (1846)  xxvn,  698.) 

3  Gibbon,  ed.  Bury,  in,  343-4.     Of.  Hodgkin's  Italy,  i,  829-30. 

4  Burgundiones  partem  Gallitz  propinquantem  Rheno  obtinuerunt.    Jovinus 
et  Sebastianus  fratres  in  Galliis  regno  arrepto  interempti.    Prosper  Aquitanus, 
Chron.  Integrum  in  Migne  (1846)  LI,  p.  591. 

6  There  is  still  a  Guntersbluhm  between  Worms  and  Mainz  (Jahn,  329-30). 

8  It  is  through  a  fragment  of  Olympiodorus  that  we  know  of  Gundahari's 
share  in  the  business :  'lofiivos  ev  MowSia/cy  [read  T&oyowria.K<fi]  rrjs  erf  pas 
Teppavlas,  Kara  <nrov8r)v  Fwdp  TOV  'AXavov  Kal  Tuvnapiov  6s  (ptiXapxos  ^xpTj/tdTife 
ruv  BovpyovvTidvwv  rvpawos  avTjyopetidi).  Miiller,  Fragmenta  Historicorum 
Grtecorum  (1851)  vol.  iv,  p.  61.  Probably  this  happened  in  the  year  411. 


Stories  known  to  Widsith:  Burgundian  heroes      59 

would  have  been  all  history  had  to  tell  of  him,  had  he  not,  more 
than  a  score  of  years  later,  fought  two  pitched  battles,  in  the 
second  of  which  he  and  all  his  warriors  were  slain. 


Chief  and  Retainer  in  German  Story. 

Gundahari's  death  was  an  incident  of  the  type  which  most 
appealed  to  the  poets  and  warriors  of  the  ancient  German 
world1.  How  some  great  lord,  attacked  by  hopeless  odds,  is 
defended  by  a  small  group  of  faithful  followers,  who  keep  up  a 
desperate  fight  after  their  lord  is  slain,  doggedly  determined 
not  to  leave  the  field  on  which  he  lies  dead :  this  is  a  tale 
which,  in  historic  prose  or  heroic  verse,  in  bombastic  Latin  or 
Greek  periods,  or  in  simple  vernacular  dialects,  is  told  over  and 
over  again  throughout  the  "  Dark  Ages8." 

Long  before,  Tacitus  had  mentioned  this  loyalty  of  the 
retainer  to  his  lord  as  one  of  the  essential  features  of  German 
character.  "It  is  a  lifelong  disgrace  and  reproach  for  the 
retainer  to  have  left  the  field  when  his  chief  has  fallen.  To 
defend  and  protect  his  lord,  and  to  assign  to  him  the  honour  of 
his  own  brave  deeds,  is  the  retainer's  essential  pledge  of 
loyalty3."  But  the  loyalty  of  the  retainer  does  not  as  a  rule 
appeal  very  strongly  to  the  Roman  or  Byzantine  writer.  When 
the  bodyguard  of  Odoacer  all  fell  around  their  lord  in  the 
palace  hall  of  Ravenna,  the  chronicler  is  satisfied  with  the 
dry  entry  occisus  est  Odoacar  rex  a  rege  Theodorico  in  palatio 
cum  commilitibus  suis*,  words  which  may  record  a  struggle  as 
heroic  as  those  in  the  halls  of  Atli  and  Rolf  and  Finn.  It  is 

1  Cf.   the   section   Hirdmandsdtfd  og  efternuele  in  Axel  Olrik's  Danmarks 
Heltedigtning,  1903. 

2  Compare  especially  the  episode  of  Cynewulf  and  Cyneheard  in  the  Anglo- 
Saxon  Chronicle:   the  Battle  of  Maldon  :  and  several  passages  in  Saxo  Gram- 
maticus,  especially  those  in  Book  n  founded  on  the  lost  Bjarkamal : 

Ad  caput  extincti  mortar  ducis  obrutus,  ac  [better  at]  tu 

Ejusdem  pedibus  moriendo  allabere  pronus, 

Vt  videat  quisquis  congesta  cadavera  lustrat 

Qualiter  acceptum  domino  pensavimus  [pensarimus]  aurum. 

(Saxo,  ed.  Holder,  1836,  p.  66.) 
Almost  exactly  the  same  phrases  occur  in  Maldon;  e.g.  11.  290-294  and  317-319. 

3  Germania,  xiv. 

4  Fasti  Vind.  priores,  in   Mommsen's  Chronica  Minora,  i,  320  (M.G.H.). 
Interfecti  sunt  quivis  ubi  potuit  reperiri  says  the  Anon.  Valesii. 


60  Widsith 

without  much  enthusiasm,  though  fortunately  more  at  length, 
that  Agathias  records  the  heroic  death  of  Phulcaris — Folchere — 
and  his  thegns.  Folchere,  a  leader  of  Herulan  allies,  had  allowed 
his  men  to  be  ambushed  by  a  picked  body  of  Franks,  concealed 
in  a  Roman  amphitheatre : 

So  the  army  was  scattered :  but  Folchere,  left  behind  with  his  body 
guard,  would  not  deign  thus  to  take  to  flight... He  made  stand  as  best  he 
could,  with  his  back  to  a  tomb,  and  slew  many  of  the  enemy,  now  rushing 
upon  them,  now  drawing  back  gradually  with  his  face  to  the  foe.  And 
while  he  might  still  have  escaped  easily,  and  his  followers  were  urging 
him  to  do  so,  "How,"  said  he,  "could  I  bear  the  tongue  of  Narses  blaming 
me  for  my  recklessness? "...So  he  stood  his  ground  and  held  out  to  the 
last,  till  he  fell  forward  upon  his  shield,  his  breast  pierced  with  many 
darts,  and  his  head  broken  by  an  axe.  Upon  his  body  his  followers  fell, 
to  a  man,  perhaps  voluntarily,  perhaps  because  they  were  cut  off1. 

The  Roman  or  Greek  is  separated  from  his  heroic  age  by 
too  many  centuries.  Court  intrigues,  theological  councils, 
miracles  wrought  by  the  corpses  of  saints,  are  of  more  in 
terest  to  him.  With  the  German  it  is  different ;  after  he  has 
been  converted  to  Christianity  the  feeling  remains  as  strong 
as  ever.  For  it  is  not  only  in  the  secular  literature,  in  the  Old 
English  Chronicle,  in  Maldon,  or  in  Saxo  that  we  find  it.  It 
fires  equally  the  Christian  poetry,  so  that  whenever  the  motive 
of  loyalty  is  touched,  the  gospel  stories  of  the  Heliand,  or  the 
legends  of  apostles,  become  for  the  moment  war-songs.  It  is 
thus  that,  when  St  Andrew's  disciples  are  bidden  to  leave  him, 
as  he  goes  on  a  desperate  errand,  they  reply: 

Whither  shall  we,  then,  go  ?  Outcast,  dishonoured,  when  men  reckon 
who  best  did  to  his  lord  war-service,  what  time  in  the  field  of  battle 
hand  and  shield  endured  hardship,  smitten  by  the  sword2. 

Guthhere. 

It  is  easy  then  to  understand  why  the  story  of  the  fall  of 
Gundahari  and  his  men  in  battle  against  the  Huns  was  of 
interest  not  merely  to  the  Burgundian,  but  to  all  his  neigh 
bours,  till,  as  the  centuries  passed  on,  it  became  known  from 
end  to  end  of  Germania.  Eight  centuries  after  his  fight 
Gundahari  was  still  remembered  from  Iceland  to  Austria,  and 

1  Agathias,  i,  15. 

2  Andreas,  405-414 :  cf.  Wiglaf's  speech  in  Beowulf  (ed.  Holder),  2864-91 : 
cf.  also  2633-60. 


Stories  Ttnown  to  Widsifh:  Burgundian  heroes      61 

three  elaborate  collections  of  the  stories  which  had  been  woven 
round  his  name  have  come  down  to  us.  In  the  Nibelungen 
Lied  we  have  the  version  which  some  Austrian  poet  or  poets 
put  together,  about  the  year  1200.  The  Saxon  versions,  as 
current  in  Bremen  or  Minister1,  were  put  together  in  the  form 
of  a  prose  saga — the  Thidreks  saga — by  a  Norseman,  writing 
perhaps  not  much  later  than  the  Southern  poet2.  Later  still, 
a  little  after  the  middle  of  the  thirteenth  century,  the  Norse 
lays  which  had  been  sung  during  centuries  in  Iceland,  Norway, 
and  Greenland,  and  which  are  still  in  great  part  extant,  were 
paraphrased  and  codified  in  the  Vglsunga  saga. 

In  all  three  cases  another  story,  originally  quite  distinct,  is 
blended  with  that  of  the  Burgundian  downfall :  the  tale  of 
Sigfrid  the  Volsung,  which  told  how  Sigfrid  slew  a  dragon 
and  won  a  mighty  hoard  of  gold,  and  a  maiden  to  be  his 
bride,  whom  he  wakened  from  an  enchanted  sleep :  and  how 
the  Niblungs,  his  treacherous  comrades,  robbed  Sigfrid  of  bride, 
and  gold,  and  life.  Gundahari  the  Burgundian  comes  to  be 
identified  with  the  Niblung  king :  at  what  date  we  cannot 
exactly  tell;  but  apparently  Widsith  does  not  know  this 
version  of  the  story.  Gundahari's  violent  death  thus  becomes 
a  just  retribution  for  his  sin.  And  so  "  the  best  tale  pity  ever 
wrought "  was  formed  around  the  historic  figure  of  the  Rhine- 
land  chief:  "the  Great  Story  of  the  North,  which  should  be  to 
all  our  race  what  the  Tale  of  Troy  was  to  the  Greeks — to  all 
our  race  first,  and  afterwards,  when  the  change  of  the  world  has 
made  our  race  nothing  more  than  a  name  of  what  has  been — a 
story  too — then  should  it  be  to  those  that  come  after  us  no  less 
than  the  Tale  of  Troy  has  been  to  us3." 

And  thus  Gundahari  has  been  sung  by  the  poets  of  fourteen 
centuries :  but  on  the  other  hand  the  historians  have  treated 
him  but  shabbily.  Gibbon  ignores  him,  except  for  the  mention 
of  his  name  in  the  Jovinus  business :  and  so  also  do  more 
recent  writers.  Yet  the  overthrow  of  Gundahari  is  mentioned, 

1  Thidreks  saga,  cap.  394. 

2  "Sagaen  er  rimeligviis  bleven  til  under  Kong  Haakon  Haakonssons  Eeg- 
jering." — C.  R.  Unger,  in  his  introduction  to  the  Thidreks  saga,  p.  iv. 

3  WiHiam  Morris :  Introduction  to  his  version  of  the  Vglsunga  saga. 


62  Widsiih 

briefly,  by  two  contemporaries  and  by  several  later  historians : 
and  the  scanty,  but  quite  reliable  information  which  we  thus 
have  from  a  number  of  Latin  sources  was  pieced  together  by 
Miillenhoff  fifty  years  ago1.  Combining  the  accounts  of  Prosper 
of  Aquitaine,  and  of  Hydatius,  Bishop  of  Chaves2,  we  have  this 
result.  That  in  435  or  436,  a  quarter  of  a  century,  that  is, 
after  they  had  gained  their  footing  in  and  around  Worms, 
Gundahari  and  his  Burgundians  again  became  restive,  and 
tried  to  press  into  Belgic  Gaul :  that  they  were  met  by  the 
Roman  general  Aetius,  overwhelmed,  and  forced  to  beg  for 
peace.  That  within  two  years  of  this  defeat  Gundahari  had 
to  face  an  onslaught  of  the  Huns,  who  slew  him,  cum  populo 
atque  stirpe  sua  to  the  number  of  twenty  thousand. 

Whether  the  later  saga  is  true  to  history  in  representing  the 
Hunnish  foemen  as  having  been  led  by  Attila,  we  cannot  tell. 
Paul  the  Deacon  says  it  was  so :  but  three  centuries  of  heroic 
song  separate  him  from  the  historic  battle.  Paul  is  obviously 
following  an  inaccurate  popular  account  when  he  connects  this 
battle  with  the  great  invasion  of  Gaul  twenty  years  later,  which 
resulted  in  Attila's  repulse  upon  the  Mauriac  plain3.  Elsewhere 


1  Zur  Geschichte  der  Nibelungensage  in  Z.f.d.A.  x,  148-9. 

2  t^36]  Burgundiones,  qui  rebellaverant,  a  Romanis  duce  Aetio  debellantur. 
[437]   Burgundionum   ccesa  xx  millia.    Hydatii    Continuatio   Chronicorum  in 
Mommsen's  Chronica  Minora,  vol.  n,  pp.  22,  23  (M.G.H.). 

[435]  Eodem  tempore  Gundicarium  Burgundionum  regem  intra  Gallias  habi- 
tantem  Aetius  bello  obtinuit  [read  obtrivii]  pacemque  ei  supplicanti  dedit:  qua 
non  diu  potitus  est ;  siquidem  ilium  Hunni  cum  populo  atque  stirpe  sua 
deleverunt.  Prosper  Aquitanus,  in  Migne,  LI  (1846),  596-7. 

435.  Gundicharium  Burgundionum  rer/em  Aetius  bello  subegit,  pacemque  ei 
reddidit  supplicanti,  quern  non  multo  post  Hunni  peremerunt.  Cassiodori 
Chronica  in  Mommsen's  Chronica  Minora,  n,  156  (M.G.H.). 

It  is  Sidonius  Apollinaris  who  tells  us  that  the  occasion  was  an  incursion 
into  Belgica,  in  his  Panegyric  addressed  to  Avitus,  c.  455  and  therefore  twenty 
years  after  the  event. 

Aetium  interea,  Scythico  quia  scepe  duello  est 
edoctus,  sequeris;  qui,  quamquam  celsus  in  armis, 
nil  sine  te  gessit,  cum  plurima  tute  sine  illo. 
nam  post  luthungos  et  Norica  bella  subacto 
victor  Vindelico  Belgam,  Burgundio  quern  trux 
presserat,  absolvit  iunctus  tibi. 

Sidonii  Carminum  vn,  230-235.  Ed.  Luetjohann  in  M.G.H. 
8  Historia  Miscella,  recens.  Franc.  Eyssenhardt,  Berolini,  1869,  pp.  323, 
332,  His  etiam  temporibus  Gundicarium  Burgundionum  regem  intra  Gallias 
habitantem  Aetius  patricius  bello  optrivit  pacemque  ei  supplicanti  concessit  (Bk 
xrv,  cap.  11).  Attila  itaque  primo  impetu  max  ut  Gallias  introgressus  est, 
Gundicarium,  Burgundionum  regem,  sibi  occurrentem  protrivit  (xv,  4). 


Stories  known  to  Widsifh:  Burgundian  heroes      63 

he  more  accurately  distinguishes  between  the  two  events1. 
Paul's  account  is  chiefly  to  be  valued  as  a  witness  to  the 
tradition  of  his  day :  Attila  does  not  fall  upon  the  Bur- 
gundians  in  their  town  of  Worms ;  Gundahari  marches  east 
ward  to  meet  his  death,  "  postquam  sibi  occurrentem  Attila 
protriverat."  This  has  ever  been  an  essential  feature  of  the 
story,  whether  told  in  High  German,  Icelandic,  or  English : 

We  will  go  and  look  on  Atli,  though  the  Gods  and  the  Goths  forbid; 
Nought  worse  than  death  meseemeth  on  the  Niblungs'  path  is  hid, 
And  this  shall  the  high  Gods  see  to,  but  I  to  the  Niblung  name, 
And  the  day  of  deeds  to  accomplish,  and  the  gathering-in  of  fame2. 

The  statement  that  Gundahari  was  cut  off  with  his  race  and 
people  is  an  exaggeration.  A  remnant  was  left,  and  some  eight 
or  nine  years  after  the  disaster  was  settled  in  a  new  home  in 
Savoy.  Burgundians  played  their  part  in  the  great  battle 
against  Attila3.  The  nucleus  (dwelling  between  the  modern 
Geneva  and  the  modern  Lyon)  gradually  extended  their  borders 
till  they  again  became  a  mighty  nation.  It  was  in  these  days 
that,  with  their  abundant  animal  spirits,  their  astonishing 
appetites,  and  their  more  astonishing  thirst,  they  vexed 
Sidonius  Apollinaris.  The  Burgundian  code  of  laws,  drawn 
up  before  516,  under  King  Gundobad,  contains  a  valuable 
reference  to  "  our  ancestors  of  royal  memory,  Gibica,  Gundo- 
mar,  Gislahari,  Gundahari,  our  father  and  our  uncle4." 

1  Attila  rex  Hunorum,  omnibus  belluis  crudelior,  habens  multas  barbaras 
nationes  suo  subjectas  dominio,  postquam  Gundigarium,  Burgundionum  regem, 
sibi  occurrentem  protriverat,    ad  universas  deprimendas   Gallias  suce  scevitite 
relaxavit  habena*. 

De  episcopis  Mettensibus,  in  Pertz  (fol.),  SS.  t.  n  (1829),  p.  262. 

2  William  Morris — Story  of  Sigurd  the  Volsung. 
*  Jordanes,  ed.  Mommsen,  xxxvi  (191). 

4  Si  quos  apud  regia  memories  auctores  nostros,  id  est:  Gibicam,  Gundo- 
marem  [or  Godomarem],  Gislaharium,  Gundaharium,  patrem  quoque  nostrum 
et  patruum  liberos  liberasve  fuisse  constiterit,  in  eadem  libertate  permaneant. 
Lex  Burg.  p.  43,  ed.  L.  B.  de  Salis,  in  M.G.H.  Leges  i,  ii,  1.  The  correct 
rendering  of  auctores  has  been  disputed.  Binding  and  Waitz  translate  "  pre 
decessors."  Gundobad,  they  think,  was  not  a  descendant  of  the  old  reigning 
house.  Jahn  on  the  other  hand  (pp.  300,  301,  footnote)  argues  pretty  con 
clusively  that  auctores  here  must  mean  ancestors.  Miillenhoff  and  Bluhme 
would  make  the  new  race  of  kings  descendants  of  the  old,  and  the  fact  that 
their  names  are  compounded  out  of  the  same  elements  tells  in  favour  of  this 
(Z.f.d.A.  x,  153-4;  vn,  527). 


64  Widsith 


Gifica  and  Oislhere. 

The  Gibica  who  thus  stands  at  the  head  of  the  Burgundian 
line  is  clearly  the  Gifica  of  our  poem,  the  Gibeche  of  High 
German,  the  Giuki  of  Scandinavian  story.  Whether  he  ever 
had  any  historic  existence  is  uncertain.  The  name,  for  the 
founder  of  a  dynasty,  is  suspicious,  in  view  of  the  frequency 
of  the  terms  beaggifa,  goldgifa,  mafiftumgifa  as  synonyms  for 
"  King1."  No  argument  can  be  drawn  from  the  occurrence  of 
this  name  along  with  those  of  historical  kings,  in  the  Bur 
gundian  laws :  the  Burgundian  of  the  sixth  century  had,  of 
course,  no  doubts  as  to  the  historic  existence  of  the  ancestor 
of  his  kings.  In  any  case  Gifica's  reign,  whether  actual  or 
mythical,  must  be  dated  back  to  the  old  days  when  the 
Burgundians  dwelt  in  the  East,  and  were  neighbours  of  the 
Ostrogoths  in  the  forests  of  the  Vistula.  After  the  Burgundians 
were  settled  in  the  West  there  would  be  a  natural  tendency 
either  to  make  him  a  king  of  the  Burgundians  in  their  new 
home;  or,  keeping  him  in  the  East,  to  forget  his  connection  with 
the  Burgundians  altogether,  and  to  make  him  a  Hun  or  Goth. 
And,  in  different  branches  of  the  old  tradition,  we  find  both 
these  things  happening.  In  the  Norse  versions  Giuki  is  father  of 
Gunnar;  and  sometimes  too  in  the  High  German  stories  Gibeche 
is  the  father  of  Gunter,  and  rules  at  Worms2.  But  in  the 
Nibelungen  Lied,  Dankrat8  is  Gunter's  father,  while  Gibeche  is 
a  champion  of  the  Hunnish  court4. 

Now  it  is  noteworthy  that  when,  in  Widsith,  Gifica  is  men 
tioned  as  ruling  the  Burgundians,  it  is  in  immediate  connection 
with  ^Etla  and  the  Huns,  with  Eormanric  the  Goth  and  Becca 
his  liegeman,  with  the  Kaiser  who  rules  the  Greeks,  and  with 

1  Wackernagel,   Sprachdenkmaler  der  Burgunden,  p.  389  (in  C.  Binding). 
Grimm  (Z.f.d.A.  i,  572-5)  argues  that  the  name,  mythical  in  origin,  ultimately 
came  to  signify  a  Giver  half  or  entirely  divine. 

2  As,  for  example,  in  the  Rosegarden  at  Worms.     In   the  Waltarius   also, 
Gibicho  is  father  of  Guntharius. 

3  Grimm  pointed  out  that  Dankrat  is  possibly  originally  synonymous  with 
Gibica  (Z.f.d.A.  n,  573).     See  also  Jahn,  126. 

4  Der  Nibelunge  Not,  ed.  Bartsch,  st.  1343,  1880.  Compare  Dietrich*  Flucht, 
7114,  where  Gibeche  is  a  counsellor  of  Ermrich. 


Stories  knowi  to  Widsith:  Burgundian  heroes      65 

C*lic  of  the  Finns.  The  poet  who  drew  up  these  lines  had 
learnt  to  think  of  Gifica  as  an  Eastland  hero :  he  probably 
knew  lays  which  represented  Burgundian  and  Goth  as  neigh 
bours  :  he  felt  no  difficulty  at  any  rate  in  grouping  them 
together1. 

The  Gislhere  who  is  mentioned  subsequently  in  our  poem 
with  other  heroes,  presumably  Gothic,  is  almost  certainly  to  be 
identified  with  the  King  Gislaharius  of  the  Burgundian  laws. 
Later  German  tradition  represents  this  prince  as  the  chivalrous 
younger  brother  of  Gunther,  Gisdher  daz  Joint*.  But  his  place 
in  the  list,  as  given  in  the  Burgundian  laws,  would  make  him 
a  predecessor  or  ancestor ;  and  this  is  borne  out  by  the  way 
in  which  his  name  occurs  in  Widsith.  Ruling  over  the  Bur- 
gundians  whilst  they  were  still  close  neighbours  of  the  Goths, 
having  dealings,  whether  in  peace  or  war,  with  Gothic  kings 
and  champions,  he  has  been  drawn  into  the  Gothic  cycle  exactly 
as  has  the  Gibeche  of  Dietrichs  Flucht,  and  like  him  is  thought 
of  as  a  retainer  of  Ermanaric,  or  at  any  rate  as  a  hero  of  the 
Gothic  cycle.  That  he  was  ever  a  Burgundian  has  apparently 
been  forgotten. 

1  See  note  to  1.  19. 

2  So  in  the  Thidreks  saga  he  is  a  younger  brother  (cap.  169).     The  part 
played  by  Giselher  in  the  Nibelungen  Lied  and  Thidreks  saga  may,  of  course, 
be  due    not   to   continuous    tradition   but   to   subsequent   learned   influence. 
See  Wilmanns   Untergang  der  Nibelunge,   1903,  pp.  23-4.    Yet  this  seems 
improbable. 


C. 


CHAPTEE  III. 

THE  STORIES  KNOWN  TO  WIDSITH.    TALES  OF  THE  SEA- 
FOLK,  OF  THE  FRANKS  AND  OF  THE  LOMBARDS. 

The  North-Sea  tribes  in  the  time  of  Tacitits.      The  Frisians  and 

Finn. 

HITHERTO  we  have  been  following  the  stories  of  those  chiefs, 
Ermanaric,  Attila,  Gundahari,  who  led  their  German  hordes 
within  ken  of  the  historians  of  the  Roman  Empire,  and  con 
cerning  whose  historical  existence  we  therefore  have  definite,  if 
scanty,  information.  To  turn  from  these  stories  to  those  of  the 
North-Sea  folk,  the  native  stuff  of  our  English  heroic  poets,  is 
like  moving  from  a  room  lighted  by  the  occasional  flash  of  a 
dying  fire  to  one  where  we  have  to  grope  in  absolute  darkness. 
For  to  the  Romans  these  Northern  tribes  were  little  known,  and 
that  chiefly  during  the  struggle  under  Tiberius  and  Germanicus. 
It  is  one  great  merit  of  Tacitus'  Germania  that  it  preserves  to 
us  fragments  of  that  information  concerning  our  forefathers, 
which  was  acquired  during  this  struggle.  For  by  the  time  of 
Tacitus  himself  the  Romans  had  withdrawn  west  of  the  Zuider 
Zee  and  of  the  Rhine :  and  these  coast  tribes  had  passed  out  of 
their  sight1. 

The  name  Ingaevones  which  these  coast  tribes  possessed  in 
common  rested,  Tacitus  tells  us,  upon  a  belief  that  they  were 
all  sprung  from  one  eponymous  ancestor  Ing2.  Most  westerly 

1  Exactly  to  what  extent  the  Romans  came  into  contact  with  the  Frisians 
is  not  certain.  That  the  Frisian  fisheries,  on  what  is  now  the  north  coast  of 
Holland,  were  at  one  time  worked  by  Roman  publicans  has  been  proved  by  an 
inscription  found  near  Leeuwarden.  See  Mnemosyne,  xvi,  439,  De  inscriptione 
romana  apud  Frisios  reperta,  by  U.  Ph.  Boissevain.  There  were  Frisian  contin 
gents,  too,  in  the  Roman  army. 

3  Germania,  cap.  n. 


Stories  known  to  Widsith :  Tales  of  the  Sea-folk    67 

of  all  these  maritime  peoples  dwelt  the  Frisians,  amid  those 
'vast  lakes  navigated  by  Roman  fleets1,'  which  have  since  become 
the  Zuider  Zee.  Tacitus  recognises  two  groups  of  Frisians — 
the  Lesser  Frisians,  dwelling  apparently  to  the  west  of  these 
lakes,  near  the  Roman  frontier,  and  the  Greater  Frisians, 
dwelling  in  the  unexplored  marshes  of  the  North  and  East. 
Five  or  six  centuries  later,  the  same  distinction  seems  to  be 
recognised  by  the  poets  of  Beowulf  and  Widsith2.  There  are 
the  Western  people,  always  associated  with  the  Franks,  against 
whom  Hygelac's  raid  was  directed :  and  the  main  body  of  the 
Frisians,  whose  traditional  hero  is  Finn  Folcwalding. 

The  tale  of  Finn  must  have  been  one  of  the  best  known 
stories  in  seventh  century  England :  of  our  five  extant  heroic 
poems,  or  fragments  of  poems,  three  refer  to  it.  The  task  of 
harmonizing  these  references  into  one  story  is  not  an  easy  one. 
But  to  investigate  the  Finn  story  in  detail  would  take  us  too 
far  afield.  The  object  of  the  present  study  is  to  see  what  we 
can  discover  from  Widsith  about  the  lost  Old  English  lays ;  the 
lay  of  Finnsburg  is  fortunately  not  all  lost,  and  its  reconstruction 
demands  a  separate  study3.  The  popularity  of  the  story  in 
England  is  not  to  be  attributed  to  Frisian  immigrants4.  In  the 
great  fight  in  Finn's  hall,  most  of  the  North-Sea  tribes  seem  to 
have  claimed  their  share,  and  the  tale  was  probably  common  at 
an  early  date  to  them  all,  and  was  brought  across  the  North 
Sea  by  gleemen  of  Saxon  and  of  Jutish  race5. 

Chauci  and  Saxons. 

The  Frisians  were  divided  from  their  next  neighbours,  the 
Chauci,  by  much  the  same  boundary  as  now  separates  the  north 
coast  of  Holland  from  that  of  Germany.  All  the  space  up  to 

1  Cap.  xxxiv.  2  see  note  to  1.  68. 

8  References  will  be  found  in  Brandl,  in  Pauls  Grdr.(2)  n,  i,  986  and  in  Heyne- 
Schiicking,  112.  For  Finn  Folcwalding  see  also  Bieger,  Z.f.d.A.  xi,  200 ;  Grimm, 
DM.  218;  transl.  Stallybrass,  i.  219. 

4  'Bpirrlav  W  ri]v  vrjffov  (Ovij  rpla  iroXvavOpwirbraTa  i;X0vo'l----'Ayyi\oi  re  Kal 
iffffoves  Kal  ol  rrj  vr)<T(f  6/auvvfjiOi  'Bpirruves.     Procopius,  Bell.  Gott.  IV,  20. 

But  this  statement  as  to  Frisian  immigrants  lacks  confirmation,  and  is 
probably  due  to  a  confusion  of  Frisians  and  Saxons. 

5  Binz  in  P.B.B.  xx,  179-186.     Binz  points  out  that  men  and  places  bearing 
the  names  of  heroes  of  the  Finn  story  are  found  chiefly  in  Essex,  and  in  that 
part  of  Wessex  which  had  originally  a  "Jutish"  population:   but  not,  oddly 
enough,  -in  Kent. 

5—2 


68  Widsith 

the  Elbe  was  occupied  by  the  Chauci,  of  whom  Tacitus  draws 
an  idyllic  picture.  Populus  inter  Germanos  nobilissimuSy  quique 
magnitudinem  suam  malit  justitia  tueri.  Sine  cupiditate,  sine 
impotentia  quieti  secretique  nulla  provocant  bella\  Beyond  the 
Elbe,  in  Holstein,  dwelt  the  Saxons,  who,  though  they  are 
strangely  enough  passed  over  in  silence  by  Tacitus,  are  located 
by  Ptolemy's  reference  to  them  as  dwelling  "  upon  the  neck  of 
the  Cimbrian  Peninsula." 

By  the  fourth  century  the  name  of  the  Chauci  has  dis 
appeared,  and  the  whole  district  from  Holstein  to  the  Frisian 
border  is  apparently  filled  with  people  calling  themselves 
Saxons2.  Clearly  some  confederation,  whether  friendly  or 
forcible,  has  taken  place,  by  which  the  Saxon  name  has  come 
to  be  applied  to  both  people.  The  Saxons  who  colonized 
England  include,  then,  the  Chauci  of  Tacitus,  in  addition  to 
the  little  tribe  in  Holstein  which  originally  bore  the  Saxon 
name3,  but  which  clearly  would  not  have  sufficed  to  settle 
Essex,  Middlesex,  Sussex,  Wessex,  and  the  lands  by  the 
Severn. 

The  main  body  of  the  Saxons  remained  in  Germany,  but  by 
constant  conquest  and  assimilation  of  Frankish  and  Thuringian 
tribes,  they  became  a  great  people,  and  at  the  same  time  lost 
their  distinctively  Anglo-Frisian  character.  Consequently  the 
modern  dialects  of  North- West  Germany  are  not  "Anglo- 


1  Germania,  xxxv.    The  Chauci  are  classed  by  Pliny  among  the  Ingaevones, 
Nat.  Hist,  iv,  14  (28)  "Ingyaeones  quorum  pars... Chaucorum  gentes." 

2  Probably  the  change  took  place  in  the  third  century,  when  the  Saxon 
name   again  meets   us   for  the  first   time   since   Ptolemy,  whilst    the    name 
Chauci  disappears  (see  Weiland,  26-7).  Hence  there  is  no  mention  of  the  Chauci 
in   Widsith,  unless  we  are  to  accept  the  exceedingly  doubtful  conjecture  of 
Miillenhoff  (see  note  to  1.  63).    Grimm  (G.D.S.,  675,  on  which  see  Rieger,l£./.d..4. 
xi,  186-7)  would  see  possible  survivals  of  the  name  Chauci  in  the  Hugos  of 
Beowulf  and  the  Hocingas  of  Widsith.    In  the  latter  conjecture  Grimm  had 
been  anticipated  by  Miillenhoff,  Nordalb.  Stud,  i,  157 ;  in  the  former  by  Ett- 
miillerd)  16.     Neither  conjecture  seems  likely.     It  has  been  urged  in  support 
that  the  district  near  the  modern  Groningen  was  of  old  called  Hugmerke,  which 
has  been  interpreted  "the  border  of  the  Hugas  "  (Chauci).    But  the  support  to 
be  derived  from  this  is  weak  geographically,  for  there  is  no  evidence  that  the 
Chauci  ever  extended  so  far  west;   and  weak  etymologically,  for  other  inter 
pretations  of  Hugmerke  need  to  be  considered.   See  Bichthofen,  Untersuchungen 
ttber  Friesische  Rechtsgeschichte,  Berlin,  1882,  Th.   n,  Bd  2,  pp.  754-5;   and 
cf.  Weiland,  29.     That  Hugas  is  equivalent  to  Chauci  has  been  maintained  by 
Much  (94) ;  for  reasons  to  the  contrary  cf.  Loewe  in  I.  F.,  Beiblatt,  xiv,  22. 

3  Moller,  V.E.  84;  Weiland,  31. 


Stories  known  to  Widsith :   Tales  of  the  Sea-folk    69 

Frisian1/'  and  the  Heliand,  or  the  Old  Saxon  Genesis,  though 
they  perhaps  show  "  Anglo-Frisian "  peculiarities,  are  not 
written  in  an  "  Anglo-Frisian "  dialect.  These  poems,  though 
Christian  in  subject  matter,  are  in  style  and  spirit  closely  akin 
to  the  old  heroic  poetry2:  whilst  the  old  tales  of  Ermanaric  and 
Gundahari,  Weland  and  Wade,  must  have  lived  on  side  by  side 
with  the  religious  poetry,  till  they  were  woven  by  a  Norwegian 
of  the  13th  century  into  a  more  or  less  continuous  story  around 
the  figure  of  Theodoric  of  Verona.  This  Thidreks  saga,  Norse 
in  diction  but  Saxon  in  origin,  gives  as  we  have  seen  the  most 
valuable  sidelights  upon  the  English,  as  well  as  upon  the  Norse 
and  High  German  versions  of  the  old  tales. 


The  Worshippers  of  Nerthus. 

East  and  north  of  the  Saxons  and  Chauci  dwelt,  in  the  days 
of  Tacitus,  a  confederation  of  tribes3.  Unfortunately,  no  common 
name  has  been  preserved,  but  we  know  from  Tacitus  that  the 
Reudigni,  Aviones,  Angli,  Varini,  Eudoses,  Suardones,  Nuithones, 
dwelt  among  fastnesses  of  wood  and  water  and  worshipped  in 
common  Nerthus — that  is,  Mother  Earth — believing  her  to 
intervene  in  human  affairs. 

There  is  a  sacred  grove  in  an  island  of  the  ocean,  and  in  the  grove  a 
car,  dedicated  and  veiled.  One  priest  alone  has  access  to  it.  He  can 
tell  when  the  goddess  is  present,  and  he  attends  her  as  she  is  drawn  by 
a  team  of  cows  in  reverent  procession.  Then  there  is  holiday  wherever 
the  goddess  condescends  to  visit  as  a  guest :  they  do  not  go  forth  to 
war ;  they  do  not  take  up  arms ;  all  weapons  are  laid  aside :  then  and 
then  only  peace  is  known  and  loved,  till  the  same  priest  brings  back  the 

1  See  Bremer  in  Pauls  Grdr.  (2>  in,  850,  860-73. 

2  Nowhere  is  the  loyalty  of  the  gesith  to  his  lord  shown  better  than  in  the 
relation  between  Satan  and  his  followers  in  the  Old  Saxon  Genesis,  as  repre 
sented  in  the  so-called  Ccedmon,  or  the  relation  of  Thomas  to  his  Lord,  as  shown 
in  the  Heliand  (3993-4002).    Cf.  Olrik,  Heltedigtning,  81. 

8  Tacitus  mentions  these  peoples  among  the  Suevic  tribes,  who  often  have 
been  considered  as  more  or  less  equivalent  to  the  "inland"  Herminones.  Yet 
these  seven  tribes  certainly  dwelt  proximi  Oceano,  and  should  therefore  rather 
be  classed  among  the  Ingaevones.  They  were  certainly  "Anglo-Frisian." 
Tacitus  has  been  enumerating  the  inland  people,  and  as  he  goes  north  he 
continues  to  enumerate  among  the  Suevic  peoples  first  the  Lombards,  then  the 
Angles  (note,  however,  that  Widsith  distinguishes  Engle  and  Swsefe  whilst 
grouping  them  together).  But  Tacitus  admits  ignorance :  Et  hac  quidem  pars 
Suevorum  in  secretiora  Germanice  porrigitur.  Propior,  ut . . .  Danubium  sequar, 
Hermundurorum  civitas.  Accordingly  he  proceeds  to  trace  the  Suevi  along  the 
more  familiar  border  lands  of  the  Danube. 


70  Widsith 

goddess  to  her  grove,  tired  of  human  converse.  Car,  draperies  and,  if 
you  will  believe  it,  the  very  divinity  are  washed  in  a  secret  lake,  in  which 
lake  the  slaves  who  do  the  work  are  forthwith  drowned.  Hence  a  mystic 
terror  and  a  pious  ignorance  of  what  that  may  be  which  is  seen  only  by 
those  destined  to  die. 

Strange  has  been  the  history  of  this  goddess  Nerthus  in 
modern  times.  Sixteenth  century  scholars1  found  irresistible 
the  temptation  to  emend  the  name  of  "Mother  Earth"  into 
Herthum,  which  nineteenth  century  scholars  further  improved 
into  Hertham,  Ertham,  For  many  years  this  false  goddess 
drove  out  the  rightful  deity  from  the  fortieth  chapter  of  the 
Germania*.  Antiquaries  identified  the  "  island  of  the  ocean  " 
with  Rtigen,  which  happened  to  possess  a  convenient  lake,  and 
diligent  enquiries  as  to  Hertha  in  that  locality  succeeded  at 
last  in  inoculating  the  inhabitants  with  a  tradition  regarding 
her.  According  to  one  assertion,  she  even  found  her  way  into 
the  proverbs  of  the  Pomeranian  peasantry3.  And  so  an  early 
Teutonic  goddess  Hertha  was  turned  loose  into  the  field  of 
comparative  mythology.  Without  wishing  to  trespass  on  that 
field,  or  rather 

Serbonian  bog 
Where  armies  whole  have  sunk, 

it  is  enough  to  state  that  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  correct 
reading  in  the  Germania  is  Nerthus,  and  that  no  goddess  Hertha 
was  ever  worshipped  by  the  ancient  Angles.  The  Scandinavian 
form  corresponding  to  Nerthus  would  be  NJQrthr,  and  such  a 
god4  was  worshipped  with  his  son  Ingvifreyr  at  old  Uppsala, 
with  rites  resembling  those  which  Tacitus  describes  as  rendered 

1  Perhaps  we  might  say  fifteenth  century  scribes:   for  some  transcripts  of 
the  Germania  of  that  period  read  Herthum,  and  one  even  nisi  quod  mam- 
menerthu  (see  Germania,  ed.  Massmann,  1847,  pp.  18,  118).     It  must  have 
been  upon  this  reading  that  Holder  based  his  Mammum  Erthum— Mother  Earth 
(Germania,  ed.  Holder,  1882). 

2  Amongst  editors  who  have  bowed  the  knee  to  Hertha  may  be  mentioned 
Oberlin  (1801),  Bekker  (1825),  Walther  (1833),  Ritter  (1834,  1836),  Kritz  (1860, 
Ertham).     The  Aldine  edition  of  1534  reads  Herthum,  following  the  reading  of 
Beatus  Rhenanus  in  his  edition  of  the  preceding  year. 

9  Grimm,  trans.  Stallybrass,  i,  256  ;  Miillenhoff,  D.A.,  iv,  470-1. 

4  The  change  in  sex  would  be  rendered  easier  by  the  fact  that  the  u-stems 
were  always,  in  the  main,  masculine,  and  in  Norse  became  exclusively  so.  A 
stage  at  which  a  male  and  a  female  Nerthus  were  venerated  side  by  side  seems 
to  be  indicated  by  Heimskringla,  i,  4  ;  Lolcasenna,  36.  For  Njorth,  see  Mogk  in 
Pauls  Grdr.(2)  in,  323  etc.,  367  etc.;  R.  Meyer,  204  etc.;  Golther,  218  etc.,  456  etc. 
For  the  change  from  Feminine  to  Masculine  see  Kock  in  Z.f.d.A.  xxvin,  289, 
Historisk  Tidskrift  (Stockholm)  1895,  166,  note. 


Stories  known  to  Widsith:  Tales  of  the  Sea-folk    71 

to  Nerthus.  The  coupling  of  Ingvifreyr  with  Njorth  suggests 
the  question  whether  Ing — otherwise  known  as  Frea,  the  lord — 
may  not  have  been  coupled  with  Nerthus  in  the  worship  upon 
the  isle  of  the  ocean. 

The  island  centre  of  this  Nerthus- worship  we  might  at  first 
sight  be  tempted  to  identify  with  Heligoland — the  "Holy  Island" 
of  the  North  Sea1.  But  that  little  rock,  with  its  grass-crowned 
red  cliffs,  and  its  stretches  of  white  sand,  could  never  have 
given  root  to  the  sacred  grove  of  the  goddess2.  We  must 
rather  place  this  in  one  of  the  (now  Danish)  islands  near  the 
Great  Belt:  perhaps  in  Zealand3,  from  which  the  spreading  of 
the  cult  across  the  Sound  to  the  Scandinavian  lands  can  have 
most  easily  taken  place.  It  is  highly  probable,  at  any  rate,  that 
the  sanctuary  was  situated  in  one  of  the  islands  of  the  Baltic. 
For  there  is  hardly  room  to  locate  the  seven  tribes  of  Tacitus  all 
upon  the  mainland ;  some  of  them  must  have  occupied  the 
adjacent  Baltic  islands. 

\ 

The  limits  of  Angel. 

Off  a  weold  Ongle... 
ac  Offa  geslog  cerest  monna 
cnihtwesende  cynerica  meest. 

The  best  of  all  possible  evidence  that  the  Angles  and  their 
kindred  tribes  once  held  the  islands  adjoining  is  given  by  a 
passage  added  to  the  old  English  translation  of  Orosius,  in 
which  Ohthere  describes  to  his  lord,  King  Alfred,  his  voyage 
from  Sdringesheal  (in  the  Bay  of  Christiania)  to  wt  Haethum 

1  The  identity  of  Heligoland  and  of  the  island  sacred  to  Nerthus  has  been 
maintained  by  Schade  (Die  Sage  von  der  heiligen  Ursula,  Hannover,  1854,  pp. 
113-118).     Beyond  the  fact  of  Heligoland  having  been  in  later  times  a  sacred 
island,  and  having  possessed  a  sacred  spring,  there  is  little  to  be  said  in  favour 
of  the  identification,    and  much  against  it.     Tacitus'  description   seems  to 
demand  either  an  island  large  enough  for  the  processions  of  the  goddess,  or 
sufficiently  near  to  the  mainland  to  allow  the  chariot  and  its  team  of  cattle  to 
be  ferried  across.     Of.  also  Miillenhoff  in  Nordalb.  Stud,  i,  128.     Weiland  in 
1889  thought  it  "no  longer  open  to  doubt  that  the  sacred  island  of  Nerthus  was 
in  the  North  Sea,  not  in  the  Baltic  "  (Die  Angeln,  9).     Becent  criticism  has 
tended  to  reverse  this  judgement. 

2  habet  arborem  nullam.     Adam  of  Bremen,  rv,  3,  in  Pertz  (fol.)  SS.  vn, 
p.  369. 

3  Much  in  P.B.B.  xvn,  195-8. 


72  Widsith 

(Haddeby,  the  modern  Schleswig).  The  voyage  takes  five 
days.  For  the  first  three  he  sails  south  down  the  Cattegatt. 
"Then  was  Denmark"  [the  original  home  of  the  Danes  in 
Southern  Sweden,  which  till  many  years  later  was  an  essential 
part  of  Denmark]  "Then  was  Denmark  to  his  left,  and  the 
open  sea  to  his  right,  three  days."  [Here  Ohthere  reaches  the 
Sound.]  "And  then,  two  days  before  he  came  to  Haddeby, 
was  Jutland  to  his  right,  and  Sillende  [?  Zealand1],  and  many 
islands.  In  those  lands  dwelt  the  Angles,  before  they  came 
hither  to  this  land."  [Having  passed  the  Sound,  Ohthere  has 
to  turn  to  the  right,  and  steers  his  way  amid  the  islands, 
keeping  Zealand  (and  Jutland)  still  on  his  right,  but  having  to 
his  left  the  smaller  islands  Falster  and  Laaland,  which  are 
mentioned  just  below  as  belonging  to  the  Danes.]  "  And  then 
for  two  days  he  had  on  his  left  the  islands  which  belong  to 
Denmark." 

The  importance  of  this  passage  can  hardly  be  exaggerated. 
King  Alfred,  we  have  seen,  was  deeply  versed  in  old  English 
poetry,  and  must  have  known  dozens  of  lays,  lost  to  us,  dealing 
with  the  old  kings  of  Angel,  their  tributary  kings,  their  feuds 
and  alliances  with  other  Baltic- Sea  folk.  And  here  we  have 
an  authority  which  we  can  hardly  regard  (in  this  part,  at  any 
rate,  of  the  Orosius)  as  other  than  that  of  Alfred  himself, 
making  not  merely  Jutland,  but  also  many  islands,  part  of  the 
original  Anglian  home. 

The  whole  of  this  territory  was  probably,  in  the  first  century, 
occupied  by  the  Nerthus-worshipping  people.  Exactly  how  we 
locate  or  identify  the  seven  tribes  mentioned  by  Tacitus  does 
not  really  much  matter.  Tacitus  has  been  enumerating  tribes 
from  south  to  north — first  the  Semnones,  then  the  Langobardi — 

1  Sillende  is  probably  Zealand  (O.N.  Selund,  or  Silund,  called  sometimes  Siel- 
lendia,  Sjalendia,  in  Latin-Danish  documents).  The  difficulties  which  have 
been  raised  with  respect  to  this  passage  are  quite  gratuitous.  It  is  unnecessary 
to  apologize  for  taking  the  "  Denmark  "  on  Ohthere's  left  as  Southern  Sweden, 
by  the  plea  that  "  Southern  Sweden  was  then  in  the  hands  of  Denmark " 
(M.L.E.  iv,  273).  This  district  was  then  as  much  a  part  of  Denmark  as  Jut 
land  is  now :  and  Alfred,  like  Adam  of  Bremen,  calls  it  by  its  name.  The  Sweden 
of  this  date  was  a  most  restricted  area.  The  difficulty  arises  only  if  we  insist 
upon  understanding  Alfred's  terms  in  their  twentieth  century  meaning.  The 
alteration  of  the  text  suggested  by  Schuck  (Folknamnet  Geatas,  p.  19)  is  un 
necessary.  See  Appendix  L,  The  geography  of  the  Orosius  compared  with  that 
of  Widsith. 


Stories  known  to  Widsith :  Tales  of  t?ie  Sea-folk    73 

and  the  use  of  the  word  deinde  implies  that  he  is  still  enumerat 
ing  them  in  this  order :  and  so  far  as  we  can  check  him  we  find 
that  he  is.  The  Reudigni,  then,  would  be  most  to  the  south,  in 
Holstein.  But  on  this  "  neck  of  the  Peninsula  "  Ptolemy  placed 
the  Saxons.  One  critic  therefore  supposes  "  Reudigni "  to  be  a 
nickname  of  the  Saxons1.  The  arguments  in  favour  of  this 
identification  are  exceedingly  inconclusive,  but  there  is  nothing 
to  be  said  against  it ;  and  as  it  enables  us  to  find  a  home  for 
the  Reudigni,  who  would  otherwise  be  destitute,  and  at  the 
same  time  accounts  for  the  extraordinary  omission  of  the 
Saxons  by  Tacitus,  it  seems  convenient  to  accept  it  as  a 
possible  hypothesis1.  Then  come,  in  Tacitus'  enumeration,  the 
Aviones  and  the  Angli.  The  modern  Angeln  enables  us  to 
locate  the  Angli  proper  in  and  around  southern  Schleswig: 
the  Aviones,  as  neighbours  both  of  the  Saxons  and  of  the 
Angles,  are  most  easily  placed  in  Fiinen  and  the  other  islands. 
Following  a  hint  of  J.  Grimm2,  Much3  would  interpret  the  name 
with  great  probability  as  the  "  island  folk,"  aud  this  interpreta 
tion  supports  the  theory  of  their  home  in  the  Baltic  Isles.  The 
Aviones  are,  in  all  probability4,  to  be  identified  with  the  Eowan, 
who  are  mentioned,  together  with  a  number  of  these  sea-folk, 
and  their  heroes,  in  Widsith. 

Breoca  [weold]  Brondiugum,  Billing  Wernum ; 
Oswine  weold  Eowum,  and  Ytum  Gefwulf, 
Fin  Folcwalding  Fresna  cynne. 
Sigehere  lengest  Sse-Denum  weold. 

The  Varini  are  certainly4  the  Wernas  of  Widsith :  following 
Tacitus,  we  should  expect  to  find  them  just  north  of  the  Angles 
in  northern  Schleswig :  and  traces  of  their  name  are  still  to  be 
found  there.  With  less  certainty,  though  still  with  some  proba 
bility4,  we  can  identify  the  Eudoses  with  the  Ytas  of  our  poem 
and  with  the  Jutae,  who,  according  to  Bede,  colonized  Kent 
and  the  Isle  of  Wight.  Following  Tacitus,  we  should  put  them 

1  Much  in  P.B.B.  xvii,  191-5.     Miillenhoff  hazarded  the  guess  that  the 
name  Reudigni  was  that  of  a  small  people  subsequently  merged  in  the  more 
comprehensive  Saxons  (Nordalb.  Stud,  i,  119).     See  also  Weiland,  p.  27. 

2  G.D.S.  (first  ed.)  472,  (fourth  ed.)  330.    But  Miillenhoff  had  anticipated 
Grimm,  Nordalb.  Stud,  i,  118  (1844). 

3  P.B.B.  xvn,  195. 

*  See  the  footnotes  to  Wernum,  Eowum  (11.  25,  26)  and  note  on  Ytum  (Ap 
pendix  D,  The  Jutes). 


74  Widsiih 

in  southern  Jutland,  the  more  so  as  this  agrees  with  Bede's 
information  about  the  Jutes.  There  is  still  territory  left  in  the 
north  of  Jutland  in  which  to  settle  the  Suardones  [or  Suarines] 
and  Nuithones — the  former  conceivably  identical  with  the 
Sweordweras  of  our  poem1. 

Most,  then,  of  what  is  now  Denmark  and  Schleswig- 
Holstein  was  in  the  days  of  Tacitus  held  by  the  Nerthus-tribes, 
with  the  Angles  dwelling  in  the  centre,  and  probably,  at  any 
rate  at  a  later  date,  giving  their  name  to  the  whole  confedera 
tion.  For  it  is  not  likely  that  Britain,  from  the  Forth  to  the 
Stour,  and  the  Wash  to  the  Severn,  was  conquered  and  settled 
by  the  little  central  people  alone :  and,  though  we  cannot  trace 
in  English  place-names  any  of  the  minor  tribes  except  the 
Varini  and  the  Jutes,  the  evidence  of  Alfred,  who  brings  the 
Engle  from  Jutland  and  the  islands,  shows  that  he  at  least 
believed  that  all  joined  in  the  settlement  of  England.  It 
is  of  particular  importance  to  the  study  of  Widsith  to  observe 
clearly  what  Alfred  says.  For  several  eminent  scholars2,  as 
suming  that  King  Alfred  and  Bede  state  that  the  Angles  came 
from  Angel,  and  that  the  ancient  Angel  must  necessarily  have 
been  coterminous  with  the  modern  Angeln,  have  argued :  that 
Angeln  cannot  have  been  the  home  of  the  ancient  Angles, 
because  it  is  too  small  to  have  held  them  all :  that  therefore 
King  Alfred  and  Bede  are  wrong,  and  that  the  home  of  the 
Angles  was  somewhere  far  inland,  on  the  banks  of  the  middle 
and  upper  Elbe.  This  view  cannot  be  passed  over  in  silence 
by  a  student  of  Widsith,  since  our  poem  definitely  localizes 
Offa,  King  of  the  Angles,  in  Angel.  If,  then,  the  connection 
between  the  Angles  and  Angeln  rests,  as  Zeuss  thought,  upon 
a  piece  of  false  etymology  of  Bede's  time  or  a  little  earlier,  we 
must  not  attribute  Widsith,  in  its  present  form,  to  a  period 
much  earlier  than  Bede.  The  assumption  that  the  ancient  Angel 
was  no  larger  than  the  modern  Angeln  is,  however,  a  gratuitous 
one :  on  the  contrary,  we  have  only  to  think  of  Cumberland, 
Northumberland,  Lombardy,  Burgundy,  Servia  to  see  that  when 
a  national  name  remains,  while  the  nation,  as  such,  is  passing 

1  Although  the  two  names  do  not  correspond  phonetically.  See  note  to  1.  62. 
a  E.g.  Zeuss,  496;  Steenstrup  in  Danmarks  Riges  Historie,  i,  76-77. 


Stories  known  to  Widsith :  Tales  of  the  Sea-folk    75 

away,  the  waning  of  the  nation  is  naturally  accompanied  by  a 
shrinkage  in  the  application  of  the  name.  Alfred's  statement 
as  to  the  wide  extent  of  the  territory  occupied  by  the  Angles 
before  their  emigration  to  Britain  may  be  taken  as  indicating 
that  here,  as  everywhere  else  in  Germany,  a  confederation  of 
the  smaller  tribes  of  Tacitus'  day  had  taken  place,  and  that  the 
name  Angli  had  come  to  be  applicable  to  the  whole  or  a  great 
portion  of  the  Nerthus- worshipping  tribes. 


The  Danes. 

The  immediate  neighbours  of  the  Angles  (using  the  term  in 
the  broad  sense)  were  the  Danes,  dwelling  originally  on  what  is 
now  the  southern  coast  of  Sweden1.  These  two  seafaring  people, 
separated  only  by  the  narrow  seas,  must  have  been  em 
phatically  either  friends  or  enemies.  Especially  must  this 
have  been  the  case  after  the  Angles  began  to  migrate  to 
Britain  and  the  Danes  began  to  settle  in  the  vacant  lands — 
two  events  which  followed  hard  upon  one  another.  The  emi 
gration  of  the  Angles,  we  know,  lasted  through  the  latter  half 
of  the  fifth  century  and  great  part  of  the  sixth.  Already  by  the 
beginning  of  the  sixth  century,  Danes  had  probably  occupied 
most  of  Jutland  as  well  as  Zealand2.  By  the  end  of  the  sixth 
century,  it  is  asserted,  they  were  in  possession  up  to  the  Eider3. 
Now  this  Danish  settlement  may  have  been  a  hostile  one  ;  but, 
on  the  other  hand,  it  may  have  taken  place  by  a  friendly  ar 
rangement,  an  understanding  that  Danish  immigrants  might 
claim  any  vacant  land,  but  must  not  disturb  such  of  the  old 
inhabitants  as  chose  to  remain  behind.  A  friendly  settlement 

1  It  must  be  noted  that  although  Tacitus,  Pliny  and  Ptolemy  know  the 
Cimbric  Chersonnese,  and  Ptolemy  knows  it  well,  none  of  them  know  of  the 
Danes,  unless  the  Danes  are  to  be  identified  with  the  Aavduvts  of  Ptolemy 
u,  11,  16.     The  Daukiones  are   neighbours  of   the  Goutai   in   the  south  of 
Skandia.     Jordanes  (cap.  in,  23)  mentions  the  Danes,  and  the  context  would 
lead  us  to  suppose  that  he  placed  them  in  Scandinavia.     From  a  passage  in 
Procopius   (Bell.    Gott.  n,    15)   we   should  gather  that  there  were  Danes  in 
Jutland  about  the  year  510,   and   from   this  time   onward  mention   of  the 
Danes  is  fairly  frequent.    As  the  Angles  pass  into  Britain,  the  Danes,  stepping 
into  their  places,  come  within  the  view  of  the  Roman  and  Greek  writers. 

2  See  Holier  V.E.  5  (footnote). 

3  Bremer  in  Pauls  Grdr.(2)  in,  837. 


76  Widsifh 

seems  quite  likely  on  a  priori  grounds.  It  is  true  that  we  hear 
little  of  such  arrangements  during  these  centuries,  because  the 
historians  are  only  concerned  with  territorial  squabbles  just 
when  they  lead  to  big  battles  and  wholesale  slaughter;  yet 
the  constant  migrations  would  have  been  impossible  without 
some  mutual  understandings.  The  battles  we  hear  of  spring 
from  those  cases  where  rival  claims  could  not  be  harmonized1. 
Beowulf  shows  that  the  northern  courts  of  the  sixth  or  seventh 
century  were  not  ignorant  of  diplomacy.  And  in  the  case  we 
are  considering  there  would  be  no  cause  for  quarrel.  Danish 
settlers  would  find  enough  vacant  land,  and  more  than  enough, 
for  Angel  proper  remained  desert  till  Bede's  time.  The  waning 
Anglian  folk,  deprived  of  their  best  warriors,  and  left  with  more 
old  men,  women,  children  and  cattle  than  they  could  well 
protect,  would  live  in  fear  of  sea-raids  of  Vikings,  whether 
Heruli  or  Heathobards,  or  land  raids  from  the  Suevic  folk  to 
the  south,  who  had  ancient  grudges  to  pay  off  dating  from  the 
time  of  Offa.  The  remaining  Angles  would  see  with  satisfac 
tion  stalwart  Danes  coming,  not  to  plunder,  but  to  settle  and  to 
take  up  land  in  neighbourhoods  which  had  been  left  naked  and 
defenceless2.  The  newcomers  would  soon,  and  all  the  more 
quickly  if  they  started  with  a  common  ancestral  hatred  for 
Heathobard  plunderers,  be  united  to  the  old  inhabitants  by 
their  common  interest  in  defending  the  country.  There  is  a 
good  deal  of  circumstantial  evidence  that  things  happened  in 
this  way. 

Saxo  Grammaticus  begins  his  Danish  history  with  the 
brothers  Dan  and  Angul8.  He  describes  them  as  the  joint 
founders  and  rulers  of  the  Danish  race :  from  Dan  sprang  the 
royal  line  of  Denmark ;  whilst  Angul  gave  his  name  to  the 

1  Cf.  Gregory  of  Tours,  Historia  Francorum,  v,  15.     A  quarrel  arises  from 
the  unexpected  return  of  a  tribe  to  territories  which  they  had  vacated,  and 
which  they  find  occupied  by  new  settlers.     Negociations  take  place,  which 
break  down  owing  to  the  excessive  claims  of  the  original  owners.     Definite 
agreements  between  tribes  who  invaded  new  lands  and  those  who  occupied  their 
old  homes  are  mentioned  by  Procopius,  Bell.  Vand.  i,  and  Paul  the  Deacon,  n,  7. 

2  The  Danes  in  Widsith  and  Beowulf  are  not  a  sea-roving  people,  but  are 
rather  busied  in  defending  their  own  borders  from  pirates. 

3  Dan  igitur  et  Angul,  a  quibus  Danorum  cepit  origo . . .  non  solum  conditores 
gentis  nostre,  verum  eciam  rectores  fuere  (Saxo,  i,  1).     See  also  Bremer  in  Pauls 

in,  853. 


Stories  known  to  Widsith :  Tales  of  the  Sea-folk     77 

province  he  ruled,  and  his  successors,  when  they  obtained 
possession  of  Britain,  changed  its  name  to  a  new  one  derived 
from  their  fatherland.  Now  the  Danes  must  have  been  quite 
aware  that  the  English,  with  their  widely-differing  dialect,  were 
not  as  near  of  kin  to  them  as  the  Swedes,  Geats,  and  Norwegians, 
who  spoke  an  almost  identical  tongue.  The  place  of  honour 
given  to  Angul  as  one  of  the  two  sources  of  the  Danish  race 
probably  points  back  to  a  time  when  Danish  bards  and 
genealogists  were  conscious  that  their  nation  contained  an 
Anglian  element. 

Again,  we  have  seen  that  the  cult  of  Ing  and  Nerthus  spread 
into  the  heart  of  Sweden.  This  cult  can  have  passed  from  the 
isle  of  the  ocean  mentioned  by  Tacitus  to  old  Uppsala  only 
through  the  intermediate  Danes,  who  still  at  this  time  held  the 
whole  of  what  is  now  the  south  coast  of  Sweden  ;  and  friendly 
relations  and  inter-marriage  rather  than  incessant  warfare 
would  make  it  easy  for  the  Ingaevonian  worship  to  spread 
among  the  Danes,  till  we  find  in  Beowulf  an  Anglian  poet 
bestowing  upon  them  the  title  of  "friends  of  Ing1."  The 
Angles  came  to  regard  the  Danes  as  peculiarly  the  wor 
shippers  of  Ing,  for  at  last  an  English  poet  says  "Ing  was 
first  seen  among  the  east  Danish  folk2." 

The  silence  of  our  authorities  is  also  strong  evidence  that 
the  Danish  settlement  of  Anglian  lands  was  a  quiet  and 
peaceable  one.  Had  there  been  a  protracted  struggle  between 
Angle  and  Dane,  heroic  defences  of  old  halls  against  over 
mastering  odds,  these  things  would  probably  have  passed  into 
legend  and  song.  But  we  hear  nothing  of  such  contests.  On 
the  contrary,  every  reference  to  the  Danes  in  old  English  verse 

1  Hrothgar  is  twice  called  protector  or  prince  of  the  Friends  of  Ing,  eodor 
Ingwina  (1044),  frea  Ingwina  (1320).      His  more  usual  title  is  frea  (eodor) 
Scildinga.     It  would  be  interesting  to  know  whether  an  English  poet  of  the 
seventh   century  regarded  Ingwine   and   Scildingas  as   synonyms,    or  if  the 
names  are  felt  to  refer  to  two  sections  of  a  mixed  people,  over  whom  the 
Danish  king  rules.     Cf.  Sarrazin  in  Engl.  Stud.  XLII,  3,  11,  etc. 
Ing  wees  cerest  mid  East  Denum 
gesewen  secgun,  oj>  he  sffiftan  est  [eft  Grein,  Kluge] 
ofer  wag  gewat;   ween  after  ran; 
~5w«  Heardingas  ftone  hcele  nemdun. 

Runic  Poem  (67-70). 

We  must  not  however  forget  that  Tacitus  does  not  count  the  Nerthus-tribes 
as  Ingaevones,  but  as  Suevi. 


78  Widsith 

is  couched  in  the  most  friendly  and  respectful  tone :  a  tone 
which  would  be  inconceivable  if  the  English  settlers  had  sailed 
from  the  old  Angle  land  leaving  behind  them  burning  home 
steads,  slaughtered  friends,  and  triumphant  Danes1. 

And  this  gradual  settlement  of  the  Danes  amid  the 
gradually  departing  Anglian  tribes  would  explain  why  old 
English  poetry  is  interested  in  the  Danes:  their  kings,  their 
foes,  and  above  all  their  great  Hall.  It  is  not,  as  we  might  too 
hastily  assume  from  Beowulf,  that  the  English  were  normally 
more  concerned  with  the  doings  of  Scandinavian  kings  than 
with  those  of  their  own  heroes ;  for  Beowulf  is  exceptional  in 
the  interest  shown  in  the  warfare  of  Swedes  and  Geats.  Putting 
together  all  the  references  we  can  find  in  English  to  heroic 
stories,  we  find  no  particular  interest  in  these  matters2. 
Geats  and  Swedes  and  the  Swedish  king  Ongendtheow  are 
just  mentioned  in  Widsith.  But  on  the  other  hand  in  Widsith 
we  hear  of  four  different  Danish  kings:  Alewih,  Sigehere, 
Hrothwulf  and  Hrothgar;  whilst  the  fight  at  Heorot  must 
have  been  very  well  known,  for  the  names  of  the  hostile 
chiefs,  Froda  and  Ingeld,  are  to  be  met  with  often  enough  in 
England3.  Alcuin  the  Northumbrian,  writing  to  a  bishop  of 
Lindisfarne,  quotes  Ingeld  as  the  typical  hero  of  song4.  That 
the  English  should  have  long  felt  an  interest  in  the  fate  of 
Heorot  is,  after  all,  natural,  when  we  remember  that  the  ground 
on  which  it  stood  had  perhaps  been  theirs,  and  may  have  been  an 
Anglian  stronghold  or  sacred  place.  Bold  theorists  have  even 


1  The  argument  is  stated  very  well  by  Miillenhoff,  Beovulf,  88.    But  the 
case  is  even  stronger  than  Miillenhoff  saw;   for  the  lines  in  Widsith  do  not 
point  to  any  conflict  between  Offa  and  Alewih  the  Dane.     It  is  merely  stated 
that  Alewih,  though  the  bravest  of  men,  did  not  surpass  Offa  (see  note  to  1.  37). 
The  name  of  Alewih  was  remembered  in  Mercia,  and  comes  into  the  pedigree 
of  Offa  II.     See  also  Weiland,  p.  40;  otherwise  Binz  in  P.B.B.  xx,  169. 

2  The  name  Hygelac  is  met  not  infrequently  in  northern  England. 

3  See  Binz  in  P.B.B.  xx,  173-4. 

4  Verba  dei  legantur  in  sacerdotali  convivio;  ibi  decet  lectorem  audiri,  non 
citharistam,  sermones patrum,  non  carmina  gentilium.  Quid  Hinieldus  cum  Christo  ? 
The  king  of  Heaven  must  not  be  mentioned  with  pagan  kings  who  are  now 
lamenting  in  Hell.     The  passage  is  quoted  by  Oskar  Janicke  in  his  Zeugnisse 
und  Excurse  zur  deutschen  Heldensage  (Z.f.d.A.  xv,  314),  on  the  authority  of  a 
MS  of  which  he  does  not  give  particulars.     The  reference  to  Ingeld  does  not 
occur  in  the  received  text  (Letter  to  Speratus,  ed.  Froben,  1,  1,  77).     It  will  be 
found  however  in  P.  Jaffa's  Monumenta  Alcuiniana  (Bibliotheca  Eer.  Germ,  vi), 
Berlin,  1873,  p.  357 ;  Epistolee,  81. 


Stories  known  to  Widsiih :  Tales  of  the  Sea-folk    79 

identified  the  town  where  Hrothgar  built  Heorot1  with  the 
sacred  place  of  the  Nerthus-cult :  and  the  holy  grove  with 
its  dread  lake  in  Tacitus  may  remind  us  of  the  mere,  over 
shadowed  by  trees,  in  Beowulf. 


The  onslaught  at  Heorot. 

Hro^vndf  and  Hroftgar... 

forheowan  cet  Heorote  Heafto-Beardna  tyrym. 

The  chief  value  of  the  references  to  Heorot  in  Widsiih  lies 
in  their  correcting  the  impressions  which  we  get  from  Beowulf. 
Heorot  is  not  thought  of  by  our  poet  as  the  place  where 
Beowulf  fights  with  monsters,  but  as  the  scene  of  a  struggle 
between  Danes  and  Heathobards. 

This  struggle  is  not  forgotten  in  Beowulf,  but  it  is  pushed 
into  the  background,  and  appears  as  a  mere  ornament  to 
decorate  the  speech  of  the  hero,  and  show  his  foresight. 
Beowulf,  on  his  return  home,  tells  his  king  how  the  old  feud 
between  Dane  and  Heathobard  has  for  the  moment  been  settled, 
and  how  Freawaru,  the  daughter  of  Hrothgar,  has  been  given 
in  marriage  to  Ingeld,  the  son  of  the  Heathobard  chief  Froda, 
who  had  fallen  in  the  feud.  But  the  peace,  Beowulf  thinks, 
will  not  be  lasting.  Some  survivor  of  the  fight  will  urge  on 
the  younger  man  to  revenge,  showing  him  a  young  Dane 
wearing  his  father's  sword : 

Canst  thou,  my  lord,  tell  the  sword,  the  dear  iron,  which  thy  father 
carried  to  the  fight,  when  he  bore  helm  for  the  last  time,  where  the  Danes 
slew  him  and  had  the  victory?.. .And  now  here  the  son  of  one  of  those 
slayers  paces  the  hall,  proud  of  his  arms,  boasts  of  the  slaughter  and  wears 
the  precious  sword  which  thou  by  right  shouldst  wield. 

Nothing  could  better  show  the  disproportion  of  Beowulf, 
which  "puts  the  irrelevances  in  the  centre  and  the  serious 
things  on  the  outer  edges2,"  than  this  passing  allusion  to  the 
story  of  Ingeld.  For  in  this  conflict  between  plighted  troth 

1  See  Much  in  P.B.B.  xvn,  196-8,  Mogk  in  Pauls  Grdr.($  in,  367,  Kock  in 
Historisk   Tidskrift   (Stockholm)    1895,    162-3,    identifying  Leithra  with  the 
Nerthus-temple ;  and  an  article  by  Sarrazin,  Die  Hirsch-Halle,  in  Anglia,  xix, 
368-91 ;  also  his  Neue  Beowulfstudien  and  Der  Grendelsee  in  Engl.  Stud.  XLII, 
6-13,  identifying  both  Leithra  and  the  Nerthus-temple  with  Heorot. 

2  Ker,  Dark  Ages,  253. 


80  Widsith 

and  the  duty  of  revenge  we  have  a  situation  which  the  old 
heroic  poets  loved,  and  would  not  have  sold  for  a  wilderness 
of  dragons. 

Perhaps  the  speech  of  the  old  warrior  in  Beowulf  is  taken, 
with  little  or  no  modification,  from  an  Ingeld  lay1.  In  any  case, 
this  egging  on  is  evidently  an  essential,  perhaps  the  essential 
part  of  the  story,  for  it  reappears  in  the  Danish  song,  as  para 
phrased  by  Saxo  Grammaticus.  His  version  however  is  dis 
torted.  Frotho,  the  ancient  foe  of  the  Danes,  has  become  a 
Danish  king2,  slain  by  the  Saxons.  Yet  the  speech  of  the  eald 
cescwiga  survived  these  changes,  and  has  provided  Saxo  with 
material  for  eighty  sapphic  stanzas. 

lit  quid,  Ingelle,  vicio  sepultus 
Vindicem  patris  remoraris  ausum  ? 
Num  pii  cladem  genitoris  equo 

Pectore  duces  1 

Re  magis  nulla  cuperem  beari 
Si  tui,  Frotho,  juguli  nocentes 
Debitas  tanti  sceleris  viderein 

Pendere  penas3. 

Needless  to  say  the  old  warrior's  egging  on  is  successful. 
Ingellus  is  stirred,  and  successfully  avenges  his  father. 
Saxo  is  correct,  in  so  far  as  he  preserves  the  tradition  of  a 
Danish  victory.  For  Widsith  shows  us  that  in  the  original 
story  the  Danes  were  victorious ;  but  both  Widsith  and  Beo 
wulf  show  that  in  this  story  Ingeld  was  the  leader,  not  of  the 
victorious  Danes,  but  of  their  defeated  foemen4.  Probably 

1  Miillenhoff,  Beovulf,  43;  Moller,   V.E.  105. 

2  Hence  the  degradation  of  Frothi  in  later  Scandinavian  tradition,  where  he 
becomes  a  slayer  of  his  kin  (Saga  of  Rolf  Kraki,  Grdttasyngr).     This  is  because 
Frothi,  having  been  taken  into  the  line  of  Danish  kings,  could  be  regarded  as 
having  a  feud  with  the  family  of  Halfdan  only  by  the  supposition  of  domestic 
strife.    Cf.  Neckel,  Studien  iiber  Frdfti  in  Z.f.d.A.  XLVIII,  182,  and  Heusler,  Zur 
Skioldungendichtung  in  Z.f.d.A.  XLVHI,  57. 

3  Ed.    Holder,  pp.  205-13.    For  a  parallel  between  the  wicinga  cynn  of 
Widsith  and  the  viking  life  as  outlined  in  the  song  translated  by  Saxo,  cf. 
Neckel  in  Z.f.d.A.  XLVIII,  183  etc. 

4  Koegel  has  argued  that   Saxo,   in   representing  the  attacking  party  as 
Danes,  is  true  to  the  original  version.     He  thinks  that  in  this  original  story 
Hrothgar  and  his  people  were  Angles  of  the  islands,  defending  their  homee, 
still  with  success,  against  the  forward  pressing  Danes  (Heafto-beardan).     Later, 
hi  the  7th  or  8th  century,  when  the  fact   that  of  old  the  Angles  dwelt  on 
the  islands  of  the  Gattegatt  had  been  forgotten,  it  was  assumed  that  a  king 
ruling  there  must  necessarily  have  been  a  Dane,  and  the  story  recast  accord 
ingly  (Ltg.  i,  1,  157).     Not  only  is  there  much  to  be  said  against  this  inter 
pretation,  but  also  the  grounds  upon  which  it  rests  are  quite  unsound,  for 


Stories  known  to  Widsifh :  Tales  of  the  Sea-folk    81 

Ingeld1  was  slain  in  this  struggle,  and  certainly  the  eald  cescwiga 
fell,  fighting  to  the  last.  In  Scandinavian  story  the  death  of 
this  old  warrior,  Starkath,  was  remembered,  though  not  in  con 
nection  with  Ingeld's  revenge.  According  to  one  version  his 
severed  head  bit  the  earth  when  it  met  the  ground :  in  another 
story  "  the  trunk  fought  on  when  the  head  was  gone2." 


The  Lords  of  Heorot. 

Hro^wulf  and  Hrofigar  heoldon  lengest 
sibbe  cetsomne  suhtorfcedran. 

It  was  possible  for  Saxo  to  transform  the  foes  of  the  Danes, 
Frotho  and  his  son  Ingellus,  into  Danish  kings  without  deposing 
their  adversaries  Rolf  and  Roe  (Hrothwulf  and  Hrothgar)  from 
their  true  place  as  Danish  monarchs.  For  he  has  divorced  the 
story  of  Ingellus'  revenge  entirely  from  that  of  Hrothgar  and 
his  kin,  which  he  gives  in  a  quite  different  part  of  his  book. 

This  Danish  story  of  Hrothgar  and  Hrothwulf,  though  it 
preserves  the  kinship  exactly  as  in  the  old  English  tradition, 
represents  differently  the  parts  played  by  the  members  of  the 
Danish  house  towards  each  other.  It  is  preserved  not  only  in 
Saxo,  but  also  in  the  Saga  of  Rolf  Kraki,  which  was  written 
down  from  tradition  some  two  centuries  after  Saxo's  time. 
Haldanus  as  Saxo  calls  him,  Halfdan  as  he  is  in  the  Saga, 
leaves  two  sons  Roe  (Hroarr)  and  Helgo  (Helgi).  Roe  rules 
Denmark  and  founds  Roskild,  but  Helgo  becomes  a  mighty  sea 
ting — he  is,  in  fact,  that  Helgi  Hundingsbane  who  is  the  hero 
of  the  Eddie  Helgi  lays.  In  time  Roe  is  slain — his  slayer  in 
Saxo  is  called  Hodbroddus,  in  which  name  we  may  perhaps  see 

(1)  we  have  seen  that  even  in  the  9th  century  the  fact  that  the  Angles  had 
once  held  the  islands  of  the  Cattegatt  was  not  forgotten,  and  (2)  it  is  nowhere 
explicitly  stated  in  Beowulf  or  Widsith  that  Hrothgar  did  rule  these  islands. 
We  simply  infer  it  from  the  fact  that  he  and  his  people  are  called  Scyldingas, 
Dene.  There  are  in  fact  no  geographical  data  in  Beowulf  sufficient  to  enable 
us  to  identify  Hrothgar  as  a  Dane :  we  only  know  that  he  is  one  because  the 
poet  tells  us  so.  Had  Hrothgar  been  an  Angle  in  the  original  story,  there  is, 
then,  nothing  to  have  prevented  him  from  having  been  localized  in  England, 
as,  in  spite  of  much  more  serious  difficulties,  Offa  was. 

1  Sarrazin  has  suggested  a  connection  between  our  Ingeld  and  another 
Ingellus  of  Saxo  (Book  n,  ed.  Holder,  p.  56).  See  Engl.  Stud,  xxin,  233.  There 
seems  very  little  in  favour  of  this. 

Saxo  vin  (ed.  Holder,  p.  274) ;  Helga  kvfya  Hundingsbana,  n,  19.    See  also 
Bugge,  H.D.  157. 

c.  6 


82  Widsith 

a  survival  of  the  Heathobeardan,  the  foes  of  Hrothgar  in 
Widsith1.  But  Helgo  avenges  his  brother,  and  in  course  of 
time  is  succeeded  on  the  throne  of  Denmark  by  his  son 
Roluo  (Hrolfr  Kraki). 

In  Beowulf  the  same  four  Danish  chiefs  meet  us.  The 
''high"  Healfdene  has  sons  Heorogar  (not  paralleled  in  Saxo), 
Hrothgar  and  Halga  the  good2.  But  Hrothgar  is  not,  as  in 
Danish  tradition,  slain  in  war,  and  avenged  by  Halga :  on  the 
contrary,  he  outlives  Halga,  and  we  find  him  both  in  Beowulf 
and  Widsith  with  a  nephew  Hrothulf,  who  is  evidently  Halga's 
son. 

For  a  very  long3  time  did  Hrothwulf  and  Hrothgar  keep  the  peace 
together. 

These  words,  in  Widsith,  seem  to  imply  that  at  length  the 
bond  between  Hrothwulf  and  Hrothgar  was  broken :  and  that 
it  was  we  gather  also  from  the  hints  in  Beowulf,  where  we  see 
Hrothulf  always  overshadowing  Hrothgar's  sons  and  nephew, — 
those  younger  cousins  who  should  stand  nearer  to  the  throne 
than  he. 

In  Beowulf 'it  is  to  be  noted  that,  although  Halga  is  clearly 
the  younger  brother,  his  orphan  son  Hrothulf  is  represented  as 
older  than  Hrethric  and  Hrothmund,  the  sons  of  king  Hrothgar. 
For  Hrothulf  has  won  his  place  of  honour,  and  is  allowed  to  sit 
side  by  side  with  the  king;  "where  the  two  good  ones  sat,  uncle 
and  nephew :  as  yet  was  there  peace  between  them,  and  each 
was  true  to  the  other4."  Hrothgar's  sons  on  the  other  hand 
have  to  sit  with  the  juniors,  the  giogoth6.  About  Heoroweard, 
the  son  of  the  elder  brother  Heorogar  who  had  reigned  before 
Hrothgar,  little  is  said  expressly  in  Beowulf:  but  it  is  evident 
that  he  too  has  been  overshadowed. 

Everywhere  we  see,  hanging  in  the  background,  like  a  black 
thunder  cloud,  the  rivalry  which  is  to  arise  between  the  too- 

1  See  Bugge,  H.D.  153-8,  181;  Boer  in  P.B.B.  xxn,  377-8;  Sarrazin  in 
Engl.  Stud,  xxm,  233-5 ;  xxvm,  411 ;  Chadwick,  300.     The  conjecture  that  the 
Hothbrodd  of  Saxo  and  of  the  Helgi  lays  is  a  personification  of  the  Heatho 
beardan  was  made  independently  by  Bugge,  Boer  and   Sarrazin.     It  seems 
exceedingly  probable,  in  view  of  the  way  in  which  kingly  and  tribal  names 
interchange.     Of.   Ostrogotha,  Hoeing,  Hunding,  Scylding. 

2  Enumerated  in  order  of  age,  as  is  proved  by  11.  465-9. 

3  Literally  "for  the  longest  time,"  lengest.     See  note  to  1.  45. 
*  1163-5.  5  1188-91. 


Stories  known  to  Widsith :  Tales  of  the  Sea-folk     83 

mighty  Hrothulf  and  his  young  cousins.  Equally  with  the  poet 
of  Widsith,  the  poet  of  Beowulf  cannot  mention  Hrothulf  and 
Hrothgar  together  without  foreboding  evil : 

Hrothgar  and  Hrothulf.  Heorot  was  filled  full  of  friends :  at  that  time 
the  mighty  Scylding  folk  in  no  wise  worked  treachery1. 

But  the  impending  evils  are  alluded  to  most  clearly  in  the 
"  tragic  irony  "  with  which  the  Beowulf  poet  makes  Hrothgar 's 
queen  refer  to  Hrothulf  and  his  future  bearing  toward  her  sons. 
Addressing  Hrothgar,  she  says : 

I  know  that  my  gracious  Hrothulf  will  support  the  young  princes 
in  honour,  if  thou,  friend  of  the  Scyldings,  shouldst  leave  the  world  sooner 
than  he.  I  ween  that  he  will  well  requite  our  children,  if  he  remembers 
all  which  we  two  have  done  for  his  pleasure  and  honour,  being  yet  a 
child. 

Then  turned  she  to  the  bench  where  her  children  were,  Hrethric 
and  Hrothmund2. 

The  story  has  been  lost:  but  fitting  together  one  obscure 
allusion  in  Saxo,  which  he  himself  reproduced  without  under 
standing3,  with  a  name  in  an  old  genealogy,  we  find,  almost 
beyond  doubt,  that  Hrothulf  not  only  deposed  but  also  slew  this 
young  Hrethric. 

It  is  in  contrast  with  this  tragic  background  that  the  poet 
of  Beowulf  emphasizes  the  generous  confidence  towards  each 
other  of  Beowulf  and  his  kinsman,  king  Hygelac.  After 
Beowulf,  like  a  good  thane,  has  presented  to  his  lord  the 
spoils  he  has  just  won,  the  poet  moralizes,  "So  should  a 
kinsman  do :  and  not  weave  a  net  of  malice  for  another  with 
secret  craft :  nor  prepare  death  for  his  comrade  in  arms."  Such 
comment  seems  harsh,  and  the  allusion  to  treachery  uncalled 
for,  until  we  notice  what  that  present  is  which  Beowulf  has  just 
given  to  his  lord.  It  is  a  war-panoply,  which  of  old  belonged 
to  Hrothgar's  brother,  King  Heorogar,  but  which  has  not  been 
given  to  Heoroweard,  Heorogar's  son.  No :  the  armour  has 
been  given  to  Beowulf  the  stranger,  and  Heoroweard  has  been 
deprived  of  his  father's  weapons.  Small  wonder  if  later  he  is 

1  1017-19.  3  1180-9. 

3  Saxo,  n  (ed.  Holder,  p.  62).  Eoluc  is  referred  to  as  Qui  natum  Bjki  Eiricum 
stravit  avari :  the  reign  of  Boricus  is  placed  by  Saxo  after  that  of  Boluo  (Books 
in  and  iv)  :  Saxo  does  not  connect  him  with  Befricus  son  of  B#kus.  In  Lang* 
feftgatal  we  have  Hrarekr  Hnauggvanbaugi  son  of  Ingiald,  and  Hrcerekr 
Slaungvanbaugi  son  of  Halfdan.  See  Langebek  i,  5. 

6—2 


84  Widsith 

contemptuously  thrust  aside  by  Hrothulf.  But  Heoroweard 
had  his  revenge.  Saxo  and  the  Saga  of  Rolf  Kraki  tell  us 
how  Hiarwarus  (HjgrvarSr)  treacherously  plotted  against  Roluo 
(Hrolfr).  Saxo  did  not  know  who  Hiarwarus  was,  or  what  was 
the  ground  of  his  quarrel  with  Roluo:  but  he  tells  how,  by 
night,  after  a  banquet,  he  and  his  men  rose  upon  Roluo  and  his 
warriors,  and  how  Roluo's  loyal  men  fell  around  him,  fighting  in 
the  burning  hall. 

We  cannot  rightly  understand  Beowulf  unless  we  realise  the 
background  against  which  the  hero  is  depicted.  The  poet 
meant  Beowulf  to  stand  out  in  contrast  to  the  masters  of 
Heorot,  a  house  of  heroes  second  to  none  in  all  northern 
story,  but  tainted  by  incest  and  the  murder  of  kin  almost 
beyond  the  measure  of  the  lords  of  Thebes  or  the  house  of 
Pelops.  So  he  depicts  in  his  hero  loyalty,  duty,  subordination 
of  his  own  fortunes  to  those  of  his  chief. 

Widsith  shows  us  that  it  was  this  terrible  and  tragic  tale 
which  the  old  poets  associated  with  the  name  of  the  hall  Heorot, 
rather  than  that  figure  of  Beowulf  the  monster-queller  which 
the  later  poet  has  chosen  to  paint  in  the  foreground1. 

Off  a  of  Angel. 
Offa  weold  Ongle. 

The  essential  part  of  the  tale  of  Offa  is  the  story  of  his  duel, 
while  yet  a  boy,  at  Fifeldor :  the  river  Eider2.  In  Beowulf  we 
find  another  story  connected  with  Offa's  name :  that  of  his 

1  See  especially  a  short  but  most  valuable  note  by  Sarrazin  in  Englische 
Studien,  xxiv,  144-6 :   Rolf  Krake  und  sein  vetter  im  Beowulfsliede  ;   and  Axel 
Olrik,  Danmarks  Heltedigtning,  1903,  pp.  11-27.     Amidst  so  much  that  is  con 
jecture,  the  identification  of  Healfdene,  Hrothgar,  Halga,  and  Hrothulf  with 
Halfdan,  Hroar,  Helgi,  and  Hrolf  may  be  accepted  as  certain.     Three  out  of 
four  of  the  names   correspond  exactly,  and  the  fourth  approximately:    the 
relationships  correspond,  and  half-a-dozen  subsidiary  marks  of  identification 
are  forthcoming.     Conjectures,   however  ingenious,  which   overlook   this  are 
simply  in  the  air  (e.g.  the  article  on  Hrothulf  by  Wilbur  C.  Abbott  in  M.L.N. 
xix,  122-5,  1905,  cf.  conclusive  answer  by  Klaeber,  M.L.N.  xx,  9,  1905). 

It  seems  almost  equally  incontestable  that  the  Rtfricus  and  Hiarwarus  of 
Saxo  are  the  Hrethric  and  Heoroweard  of  Beowulf,  and  that  the  Beowulf  poet 
foreshadows  the  quarrel  between  Hrothulf  and  his  kin.  To  my  mind  the 
assertion  made  twice  in  Beowulf  and  once  in  Widsith  that  'as  yet'  or  'for 
a  very  long  time '  or  '  at  that  time '  there  was  peace  within  the  family  implies 
necessarily  that  at  last  the  peace  was  broken.  For  a  contrary  view  see  Clark, 
100. 

2  See  note,  1.  43. 


Stories  known  to  Widsiih :   Tales  of  the  Sea-folk    85 

queen  Thryth1,  and  her  fierceness  which  none  but  he  could 
tame.  Whether  this  story  belonged  from  the  first  to  Offa  of 
Angel  we  cannot  say ;  later,  it  became  attached  to  the  name  of 
Offa  the  Second,  the  historic  tyrant-king  of  Mercia,  who,  if 
pedigrees  are  to  be  trusted,  was  descended  in  the  twelfth 
generation  from  the  legendary  Offa  of  Angel.  But  the  in 
vestigation  of  the  Thryth  story  may  be  left  to  the  student 
of  Beowulf*:  we  have  no  evidence  that  it  was  known  to 
Widsith. 

In  Beowulf  Offa  is  mentioned  as  famous  in  war,  as  one  who 
held  his  land  with  wisdom ;  but  the  story  of  his  fight  at 
Fifeldor  is  not  directly  referred  to. 

It  is  another  sign  of  the  close  connection  between  English 
and  Danish  saga  that  for  the  details  of  this  story  we  must  turn 
to  two  Danish  historians  of  the  end  of  the  twelfth  century, 
Sweyn  Aageson  and  Saxo  Grammaticus.  The  following  is  a 
summary  of  Saxo's  story,  which  is  the  fuller  and  better  of  the 
two. 

Wermundus,  the  son  of  Vigletus,  king  of  Denmark,  after  a  long  and 
prosperous  reign  begat  in  his  old  age  his  only  son  Uffo,  who  grew  up  tall 
beyond  the  measure  of  his  age,  but  dull,  stupid,  and  speechless,  so  that  all 
men  despised  him.  His  father  wedded  him  to  the  daughter  of  Frowinus, 
the  illustrious  governor  of  Schleswig,  for  from  Frowinus  and  his  sons  Keto 
and  Wigo  he  hoped  that  Uffo  would  receive  help  in  ruling  the  kingdom 
after  his  death.  But  Frowinus  was  slain  by  Athislus,  king  of  Sweden,  and 
Keto  and  Wigo  brought  disgrace  upon  themselves  and  their  country  by 
avenging  their  father  in  a  combat  of  two  against  one.  Meantime  Wer 
mundus  had  grown  old  and  blind,  and  the  king  of  Saxony  laid  claim  to 
Denmark  on  the  ground  that  its  king  was  no  longer  fit  to  rule  his  realm  : 
if  he  would  not  abdicate,  let  the  quarrel  be  decided  by  their  sons  in  single 
combat.  Wermundus,  sighing  deeply,  answered  the  Saxon  envoys  that  it 
was  not  just  to  reproach  him  with  his  age,  for  he  had  not  shirked  battle  in 
his  youth :  and  that,  as  to  his  blindness,  that  deserved  pity  rather  than 
insult.  He  would  accept  the  challenge  himself.  The  ambassadors  replied 
that  their  king  would  not  consent  to  the  disgraceful  mockery  of  fighting 
with  a  blind  man,  and  that  it  would  be  better  that  the  matter  should  be 
settled  by  the  sons  of  each.  The  Danes  knew  not  what  to  answer :  but 
Uffo,  who  by  chance  was  present,  asked  leave  to  speak,  and  "  suddenly 
from  dumb  became  capable  of  speech."  Wermundus  asked  who  it  was 
who  had  thus  craved  permission  to  speak,  and  was  told  by  his  retainers 
that  it  was  his  sou.  He  replied  that  it  was  enough  to  be  insulted  by 
foreigners,  without  the  taunts  of  his  own  household.  But  when  they 

1  For  the  form  of  the  name  see  J.  M.  Hart  in  M.L.N.  xvni,  118 ;  but  cf. 
Klaeber  in  Anglia,  xxvm,  448-452  ;  Holthausen  in  Z.f.d.Ph.  xxxvn,  118. 

2  A  detailed  study  of  both  stories  by  Miss  E.  Bickert  will  be  found  in  Mod, 
Philol.  H,  29-76,  321-376. 


86  Widsith 

insisted  that  it  was  Uffo,  "  Let  him  speak,"  he  said,  "  whoever  he  be." 
Then  Uffo  said,  "In  vain  does  the  king  of  Saxony  covet  the  land  of 
Denmark,  which  trusts  to  its  true  king  and  its  brave  nobles :  neither  is 
a  son  wanting  to  the  king  nor  a  successor  to  the  kingdom."  So  saying  he 
offered  to  fight  not  only  the  Saxon  prince  but,  at  the  same  time,  any 
champion  the  prince  might  choose  from  his  nation :  hoping  in  this  way  to 
wipe  out  the  disgrace  left  upon  his  country  by  the  murder  of  Athislus, 
perpetrated  by  Keto  and  Wigo. 

The  Saxon  envoys  jeered,  accepted  the  offer,  and  withdrew.  The 
Danes  were  astonished,  and  Wermundus  praised  the  valour  of  the  speaker. 
He  could  not  believe  him  to  be  really  Uffo,  but  he  said  he  would  rather 

S'eld  up  the  kingdom  to  him,  whoever  he  might  be,  than  to  the  proud  foe. 
ut,  when  all  assured  him  that  it  was  his  son,  he  asked  him  to  draw  near, 
and  passing  his  hands  over  him,  recognised  his  son  by  the  size  of  his  limbs 
and  by  his  features.... 

But  when  arms  were  brought,  no  coat  of  mail  could  be  found  large 
enough  to  fit  Uffo,  who  split  the  rings  by  the  breadth  of  his  chest :  even 
his  father's  was  too  small.  Wermundus  accordingly  ordered  it  to  be  cleft 
down  the  left  side  and  fastened  with  a  clasp,  thinking  it  of  small  moment 
if  the  side  protected  by  the  shield  lay  open  to  the  sword. 

Several  swords  were  offered  to  Uffo,  but  there  was  none  so  well 
tempered  that  he  did  not  shatter  into  fragments  upon  first  wielding  it. 
Now  the  king  had  a  sword  of  exceeding  sharpness,  called  Skrep,  which 
could  cut,  at  one  blow,  through  any  obstacle  whatever.  This  sword  he 
had  buried  deep,  despairing  of  his  son's  improvement,  and  wishing  to  deny 
the  use  of  the  sword  to  others.  When  he  was  now  asked  whether  he  had 
a  sword  worthy  of  Uffo's  strength,  he  replied  that  he  had,  if  he  could 
recognise  the  appearance  of  the  place,  and  find  the  sword  of  old  committed 
by  him  to  the  earth.  He  then  commanded  his  attendants  to  lead  him  out 
into  the  open  country,  and,  enquiring  the  landmarks  from  them,  found  the 
place,  drew  forth  his  sword,  and  gave  it  to  his  son.  The  sword  was  frail 
from  age,  and  Uffo  refrained  from  testing  it;  for  Wermundus  told  him 
that  if  he  broke  it  there  was  no  other  left  strong  enough  for  him. 

So  they  sought  the  place  of  combat,  an  island  in  the  river  Eider1; 
Uffo  alone ;  the  son  of  the  Saxon  king  accompanied  by  a  famous  champion. 
Crowds  lined  either  bank;  Wermundus  stationed  himself  at  the  end  of  a 
bridge,  meaning  to  throw  himself  into  the  river  should  his  son  be  slain. 
Uffo  parried  the  blows  of  his  assailants  with  his  shield,  but  from  distrust 
of  his  sword  he  hesitated  to  strike,  till  he  discovered  from  which  of  the 
two  he  had  most  to  fear,  so  that  him  at  least  he  might  reach  with  the  one 
blow.  Wermundus,  attributing  this  hesitation  to  helplessness,  drew 
himself  gradually  to  the  edge  of  the  bridge.  Meantime  Uffo  first  urged 
the  prince  not  to  let  himself  be  surpassed  by  his  low-born  comrade,  and 
then,  to  test  the  courage  of  the  champion,  called  upon  him  not  to  keep  in 
the  rear  of  his  lord,  but  to  repay  the  confidence  which  had  been  placed  in 
him.  Then,  when  the  champion  was  driven  by  shame  to  come  to  closer 
quarters,  Uffo  clove  him  asunder  with  one  stroke.  Restored  by  the  sound 
of  the  blow,  Wermundus  cried  that  he  had  heard  his  son's  sword,  and 
asked  where  it  had  fallen.  And  when  his  attendants  told  him  that  the 
blow  had  not  pierced  any  one  part  but  the  man's  whole  structure,  he  drew 
back  from  the  edge  of  the  bridge,  desiring  now  life  as  keenly  as  he  had 

1  This  place  is  referred  to  again  by  Saxo  in  a  later  book  (xn ;  ed.  Holder,  402) 
ubi  Wermundi  filium  Vffonem  cum  duobus  Saxonice  gentis  lectissimis  manum 
duelli  nomine  conseruisse  proditum  est.  The  site  can  be  identified  with  that  of 
the  modern  Eendsburg  (Miillenhoff,  Beovulf,  79). 


Stories  known  to  Widsith :  Tales  of  the  Sea-folk     87 

before  longed  for  death.  Uffo  then  urged  the  prince  to  avenge  his  retainer, 
and,  having  brought  him  to  close  quarters  by  these  appeals,  he  smote  him 
through  with  the  back  of  his  sword,  fearing  that  the  edge  was  too  weak 
for  his  strength.  Then  Wermundus  exclaimed  that  he  had  heard  a  second 
time  the  sound  of  his  sword  Skrep,  and,  when  the  judges  announced  that 
his  son  had  slain  both  his  foes,  burst  into  tears  of  joy. 

So  Uffo  ruled  over  both  Saxony  and  Denmark :  by  many  he  is  called 
Olaf  and  surnamed  '  the  Gentle '  on  account  of  the  modesty  of  his  spirit. 
His  further  deeds  have  been  lost,  though,  after  such  a  beginning,  we  may 
well  believe  them  to  have  been  glorious1. 

Such  is  the  outline  of  the  story  which  Saxo  tells  at  con 
siderable  length  in  his  elaborate  and  artificial  Latin.  Very 
similar  in  its  main  outlines,  though  not  so  well  told,  is  the 
version  given  in  the  scanty  chronicle  of  Saxo's  predecessor, 
Sweyn  Aageson2.  In  Sweyn,  while  we  miss  much  that  is  most 
picturesque  in  Saxo's  tale,  we  get  a  few  additional  details  of 
value.  Thus  Saxo  does  not  seem  to  have  made  up  his  mind  as 
to  the  reason  of  Uffo's  dumbness  and  incapacity.  Saxo's  Uffo, 
after  his  reply  to  the  envoys,  is  questioned  by  Wermundus,  "why 
he  had  taken  care  to  cover  his  sweet  eloquence  by  the  most 
studied  dissimulation  and  had  borne  to  pass  so  great  a  period  of 
his  age  without  speech,"  and  merely  makes  answer  that  he 
had  been  content  to  live  under  the  defence  of  his  father,  and 
had  had  no  use  for  his  voice  until  he  had  observed  the  wisdom 
of  his  own  land  hard  pressed  by  the  quick  speech  of  foreigners. 
To  which  Wermundus  replies  that  his  son  has  made  a  just 
judgement  in  all  matters.  Yet  Uffo's  explanation  seems 
somewhat  inadequate.  It  is  Sweyn  Aageson  who  tells  us  that 
Uffo  had  been  rendered  dumb  by  the  shame  brought  upon  his 
country  by  two  men  having  combined  to  avenge  their  father 
upon  a  single  foe :  obviously  an  allusion  to  the  matter  of  Keto 
and  Wigo,  concerning  which  we  hear  at  length  in  Saxo.  This 
detail,  supplied  by  Sweyn,  explains  in  its  turn  a  detail  given 

1  Saxo,  iv,  xxxiv-vi  (ed.  Holder,  106-115). 

2  Langebek,  i,  45-47.    The  story  is  also  given,  very  briefly,  in  the  Annales 
Ryenses  : 

"  Wermundus  Blinde,  Hie  vir  bellicosus  erat.  Hujus  tempore  Keto,  & 
Wiggo,  filii  Frowini  Praefecti  Sleswicensis,  occiderunt  Athislum  Kegem  Svecise, 
in  ultionem  patris  sui.  Huic  successit  Uffo  Starke  filius  ejus. 

Uffo  Starke.  Iste  a  septimo  aetatis  anno  nsqve  ad  trigesimum  noluit  loqvi, 
qvousqve  in  loco,  qvi  adhuc  Kunengikamp  dicitur,  super  Eydoram  cam  filio 
Eegis  Teutonicorum  &  meliore  pugile  totius  Teutonise  solus  certans,  ambos 
occidit  &  sic  conditione  utriusqve  gentis,  Teutonia  Danis  jam  qvarto  tributaria 
facta  est."  Annales  Ryenses.  In  Langebek,  i,  152,  under  the  name  of  Chronicon 
Erici  Regis. 


88  Widsith 

only  by  Saxo  :  that  Uffo's  reason  for  demanding  two  opponents 
is  that  he  may  wipe  off  the  disgrace  left  upon  his  country  by  the 
shameful  act  of  Keto  and  Wigo ;  a  disgrace  of  which,  had  we 
Saxo's  story  only,  we  should  have  supposed  that  he  had  hitherto 
taken  no  heed.  It  is  evident  that  in  the  poem  which  formed 
the  common  source  of  both  accounts  this  deed  of  shame  was 
intimately  connected  with  Uffo's  victory,  the  significance  of 
which  lay,  not,  as  it  apparently  does  in  Widsith,  merely  in  the 
saving  of  the  land  from  foreign  aggression  and  the  extending 
of  its  borders,  but  rather  in  the  wiping  off,  by  a  deed  of 
prowess,  of  the  shame  left  by  a  dastardly  murder. 

In  Sweyn,  Wermundus,  when  he  has  felt  over  the  mighty 
limbs  of  Uffo  to  satisfy  himself  that  it  is  of  a  truth  his  son, 
exclaims  "  Such  I  remember  was  I  myself  in  the  flower  of  my 
youth ! "  Finally  in  Sweyn  Uffo  enters  the  lists  girt  with  his 
father's  sword,  but  holding  another  in  his  hand.  When  the 
worthless  sword  breaks  asunder  the  German  foes  exult,  and  the 
Danes  quake  with  fear;  but  Uffo  suddenly  draws  his  second 
sword  and  fells  his  adversary.  From  this  it  has  been  argued 
that  the  immediate  source  of  Sweyn  was  not  identical  with 
that  of  Saxo ;  for  Saxo,  it  is  said,  and  with  reason,  would  not 
have  knowingly  slurred  over  a  situation  like  this1. 

It  is,  then,  from  a  comparison  of  the  historians  that  we  must 
reconstruct  the  Danish  lay.  We  see  that,  as  in  the  old  English 
battle  poems,  the  speeches  of  the  combatants  played  an  impor 
tant  part.  Uffo's  words  to  his  two  foes,  the  prince  and  the 
champion,  are  recorded  at  length  in  both  accounts. 

About  the  same  time  that  these  Danish  ecclesiastics  were 
compiling  their  histories  of  Denmark  out  of  old  traditions  and 
war  poems,  an  unknown  monk  of  St  Alban's2,  in  the  hope  of 
glorifying  his  monastery  by  commemorating  its  founder  Offa  II, 
and  his  namesake  and  ancestor  Offa  I,  was  committing  to 
writing  the  traditions  of  the  two  Offas,  as  current  in  his  day3. 

1  Olrik,  Sakses  Oldhistorie,  n,  182. 

2  Miss  Eickert  has  shown  that  there  is  every  possibility  of  the  author  having 
been  abbot  John  de  Cella  (1195-1214).     See  Mod.  Philol.  n,  29  (1904).     The 
author  was  not,  as  is  often  asserted,  Matthew  Paris. 

8  Solent  autem  de  isto   Offa  multa  narrari...ut  dicunt,  etc.  in   MS  Cotton 


Stories  knotim  to  Widsitli:  Tales  of  the  Sea-folk     89 

The  English  story  is  substantially  the  same  as  the  Danish : 
it  is  however  located  in  England :  all  recollection  of  the 
continental  Angel  has  vanished.  Warmundus  is  a  king  of  the 
Western  Angles,  ruling  at  Warwick.  Offa,  his  only  son,  is 
blind  till  his  seventh,  dumb  till  his  thirtieth  year.  A  certain 
Riganus  claims  to  be  recognised  heir  in  Offa's  place,  and,  when 
Warmundus  refuses  his  consent,  raises  an  army.  In  answer  to 
prayer  Offa  receives  the  gift  of  speech,  harangues  the  council, 
leads  his  army  against  the  foe,  joins  battle,  dashes  with  his 
men  across  the  river,  and  in  the  midst  of  the  combat  slays  the 
two  sons  of  the  usurper,  fighting  one  against  two.  Then 
follows  the  romantic  story  of  Offa's  queen  :  not  the  tale  referred 
to  in  Beowulf,  which  in  the  Vitae  Duorum  Offarum  is  transferred 
to  Offa  II,  but  a  version  of  the  widely  spread  motive  of  the 
fugitive  princess  who  is  wedded  to  a  great  king,  of  the  inter 
cepted  letters,  of  the  consequent  attempted  slaughter  of  the 
queen  and  her  children,  and  of  the  final  reconciliation — in  fact 
the  Man  of  Law's  Tale1.  Offa  is  instructed  by  a  hermit  to 
build  a  monastery  as  a  thank  offering  for  his  recovery  of  wife 
and  children,  but  he  omits  to  perform  his  vow,  as  do  all  his 
house  after  him  till  the  days  of  Offa  II,  to  whose  life  the 
monkish  biographer  then  passes.  The  history  of  Offa  II  is  a 
combination  of  historic  fact  with  details  repeated  from  the 
legend  of  Offa  I,  and  does  not  concern  us  here. 

The  relationship  of  the  Vita  Offae  I  to  the  Danish  histories 
was  a  subject  often  discussed  during  the  18th  and  early  19th 
centuries.  Early  students  necessarily  ignored  the  reference  in 
Widsith,  which  was  not  published  till  1826 ;  and  therefore, 
though  they  are  sometimes  useful  in  points  of  detail,  their 
conclusions  are  valueless2.  We  now  know  that,  five  or  six 

Julius  D  vn,  supposed  by  Miss  Eickert  to  be  an  earlier  draft  by  the  compiler  of 
the  Vitae  ;  omnium  fere  conprouincialium  assercio  in  the  Vita  Offae  I, 

These  Vitae  were  published  with  Wats'  edition  of  Matthew  Paris,  London, 
1640.     They  have  since  only  been  reprinted  in  extracts. 

1  See  the  Originals  and  Analogues  of  Chaucer's  Canterbury  Tales  (Chaucer 
Soc.)  pp.  1-84  (where  part  of  the  Vita  Offae  I  is  reproduced),  221-250,  365-414. 

2  Bibliographies  of  the  Offa  legend  will  be  found,  by  Suchier,  in  P.B.B.  iv, 
500,  and  by  Miss  Bickert  in  Mod.  Philol.  n,  29.    P.  E.  Miiller's  discussion  of 
the  subject  in  his  edition  of  Saxo  (Copenhagen,  1858,  Part  n,  Not.  Vb.  137),  as 
it  was   made  without  reference  to   Widsith,  must  be  ranked  with  the  earlier 
criticisms.   An  interesting  Celtic  parallel  has  been  pointed  out  by  G.  H.  Gerould : 
Offa  andLabhraidh  Maen,  in  M.L.N.  xvn,  201  etc.  (1902). 


90  Widsith 

centuries  before  either  Saxo  or  the  monk  of  St  Albans  was 
writing,  the  story  of  the  duel  on  the  island  of  the  Eider  was 
being  told  of  Otfa,  king  of  Angel.  The  allusions  in  Widsith 
are  not  detailed  enough  to  enable  us  to  reconstruct  fully  this 
most  ancient  version  :  but  we  can  see  that  it  was  nearer  to  the 
story,  as  later  preserved  in  Denmark,  than  to  that  preserved  by 
the  monk  of  St  Albans.  The  quarrel  was  with  an  alien  and 
not  with  a  domestic  foe ;  the  fight  took  place  by  the  Eider ;  it 
was  a  duel,  and  not  a  pitched  battle ;  Widsith  shows  us  that  in 
all  these  points  the  Danish  version  is  the  original  one.  It  is 
natural  that  this  Danish  account  should  make  Offa  into  a 
Danish  prince :  the  fact  that  he  defended  his  frontiers  on  the 
river  Eider  necessitated  this,  at  a  date  when  the  Eider  had 
come  to  be  the  frontier  between  the  Danes  and  the  German 
races  of  the  south.  Naturally,  too,  the  foe  has  come  to  be 
identified  in  Danish  story  with  these  Germans:  Saxo  calls  them 
Saxons,  Sweyn  Alamanni.  From  Widsith  we  learn  that  the 
contending  parties  were  really  the  Angles  and  Myrgings,  who 
seem  to  have  been  neighbours  of  the  Angles  on  the  south. 
There  can  be  little  doubt  that  so  much  of  the  story  as  is 
common  to  English  and  Danish  tradition  goes  back  to  an  early^ 
Anglian  lay,  brought  over  to  England  by  the  Angles,  but 
surviving  also  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  ancient  Angel,  and 
incorporated  by  the  Danes  into  their  national  stock  of  stories, 
just  as  they  incorporated  into  their  kingdom  the  ancient  Angel 
and  the  remnants  of  its  people. 

That  the  English  life  of  Offa  and  the  Danish  story  of  Uffo 
were  not  derived  the  one  from  the  other,  but  were  independent 
traditions  from  the  same  original,  had  been  perceived  by  one 
historian1  even  before  the  discovery  of  Widsith,  which  has 
rendered  it  certain.  More  recently  Mlillenhon02,  it  is  true,  has 
argued  that  the  story  had  no  continuous  life  in  Denmark,  but 
was  reintroduced  there  from  England;  but  his  arguments,  on 
examination,  have  fallen  to  the  ground3.  All  the  evidence 

1  Dahlmann,  Forschungen,  r,  234,  235. 

2  Beovulf,  80  etc. 

3  See  the  criticisms  of  Miillenhoff's  view  by  Chadwick  (125-6)  and  by  Olrik 
in  the  Ark.  f.  word.  Filologi  vin  (N.  F.  iv)  368-75 :  Er  Uft'esagnet  invandret  fra 
England  ?    Bemeerkninger  til  Miillenhoff's  '  Beovulf.' 


Stories  known  to  Widsiih :  Tales  of  the  Sea-folk     91 

indicates  that  Saxo's  story  goes  back  to  a  Danish  lay,  which,  in 
its  turn,  was  founded  upon  a  tribal  lay  of  the  continental 
Angel.  Many  of  Saxo's  proper  names  such  as  Uffo1,  Frowinus, 
Skrep2,  and,  above  all,  the  localization  of  the  fight  on  the 
Eider,  point  to  the  story  having  had  its  original  home  not  in 
England  but  in  the  old  home  of  the  Angles  in  Schleswig.  It 
is  indeed  impossible  that  Saxo  could  have  known  of  the 
localization  on  the  Eider,  if,  as  Miillenhoff  supposed,  he  drew 
from  a  tradition  which  had  travelled  to  England  in  the  sixth 
century  and  back  to  Denmark  perhaps  in  the  tenth.  On  the 
contrary,  the  tradition  Saxo  used  must  have  handed  down  the 
fame  of  Offa  of  Angel  continuously  in  the  near  neighbourhood 
of  those  lands  where  Offa  had  fought  and  ruled. 

Yet  we  must  not  suppose  that  the  tale  as  known  to  Widsiih 
was  in  all  respects  that  which  Saxo  has  preserved  for  us.  We 
cannot  exactly  gauge  what  has  been  the  loss  and  the  gain  of 
the  centuries  intervening  between  Widsith  and  Saxo.  We 
may  safely  suppose,  though  the  scanty  allusions  of  Widsith  do 
not  tell  us  so,  that  the  sluggish  youth  of  the  hero  was  an 
original  feature  of  the  story.  The  fact  that  this  trait  is 
preserved  in  the  twelfth  century  English  and  Danish  versions 
alike,  proves  that  it  must  have  occurred  in  the  common 
original  of  both  ;  and  we  know  from  Beowulf3  that  the  sluggish 
hero  who  proves  in  the  end  a  good  champion  was  as  well  known 
a  character  in  Old  English  as  he  was  in  Middle  English  story. 
It  is  puzzling,  however,  to  find  that,  in  Widsith,  Offa  wins  his 
honours  while  still  a  youth  (cniht  wesende)  whilst  the  later 
versions,  both  English  and  Danish,  agree  in  making  the  period 
of  torpor  last  till  his  thirtieth  year4. 

1  Chadwick  (126-7). 

2  Koegel,  Ltg. ,  i,  i,  162-3.     "  The  name  of  the  sword  skrep  is  not  Danish, 
and  not  Norse  as  Uhland  thought  (Schriften,  vn,  215)  but  Anglian.     If  any 
further  proof  were  needed  that  the  ultimate  source  of  Saxo's  story  is  an  Anglian 
poem,  composed  by  the  countrymen  of  Offa,  and  dating  at  the  latest  from  the 
beginning  of  the  sixth  century,  it  would  be  afforded  by  this  word.    For  skrep 
is  the  same  as  the  West  Frisian  schrep,  the  Low  German  schrap,  firm,  steadfast 
(Doornkaat  Koolmann,  3.  145  a).     The  name  bears  upon  the  story,  for  Skrep  is 
the  only  sword  which  is  sufficiently  firm  and  steadfast  to  endure  Offa's  test." 

3  1.  2187.     For  Miss  Eickert's  interesting  suggestion  that  we  should  retain 
the  MS  reading  geomor  in  Beowulf  as  a  reference  to  Offa's  heaviness,  see  Mod. 

i,  54-58.  «  See  note  to  1.  39. 


92  Widsith 

What  gives  its  dignity  to  the  Danish  story  is  the  connection, 
which  Saxo  himself  only  partly  understood,  between  Uffo's 
combat  and  the  deed  of  shame  wrought  by  Keto  and  Wigo. 
By  this  connection  the  interest  of  the  story  centres  no  longer 
in  any  single  person,  but  in  the  honour  of  Uffo's  people1.  One 
would  like  to  think  that  this  was  a  feature  of  the  original 
Anglian  story.  We  cannot  be  sure  that  it  was:  yet  it  may  well 
have  been,  for  Freawine  and  his  son  Wig  were  known  to 
English  tradition.  We  find  them  in  the  West  Saxon  pedigree 
among  the  ancestors  of  Cerdic2.  And  we  shall  find  that  Widsith 
seems  to  show  some  trace  of  a  knowledge  of  their  story. 

Perhaps,  finally,  we  should  not  be  wrong  in  attributing  to 
the  ultimate  Anglian  source  that  quality  of  straightforward 
narrative  in  virtue  of  which  Saxo's  story  of  Uffo  stands  out 
from  most  of  his  history.  Koegel3  has  claimed  for  this  episode 
an  '  epic  breadth,'  such  as  we  find  in  Old  English,  but  not  in 
Old  Scandinavian  heroic  verse.  Every  reader  of  Saxo  must 
feel  the  difference  between  the  manner  in  which  this  story  is 
told  and  the  lyrical  treatment  which  is  given,  for  example,  to 
the  story  of  the  death  of  Rolf  Kraki,  where  we  know  that  Saxo 
was  following  a  Scandinavian  lay.  But  it  may  be  dangerous  to 
argue  too  much  from  this  difference  of  treatment. 

Eadgils. 

The  story  of  the  slaying  of  Athislus,  king  of  Sweden,  as 
told  by  Saxo,  is  briefly  this.  He  invaded  Schleswig,  defeated 
Frowinus,  the  governor,  and  slew  him  in  single  combat.  Upon 
his  making  a  second  attack,  Wermundus,  assisted  by  Keto  and 
Wigo,  the  sons  of  Frowinus,  drove  him  back:  but  Athislus 
escaped  with  his  life,  although  he  bore  the  brunt  both  of  the 
attack  and  of  the  retreat.  Keto  and  Wigo  journeyed  to 
Sweden,  and,  finding  Athislus  alone,  challenged  him  to  combat; 
but  he,  pitying  their  youth,  offered  to  pay  the  money  com 
pensation  for  their  father's  death.  Keto  refused  the  offer,  and 

1  Olrik,  Sakses  Oldhistorie,  n,  185. 

2  Olrik  thinks  the  episodes  were  originally  distinct,   ' '  Oprindelig  har  de 
to  begivenheder  nsappe  htfrt  sammen  "  (184);  but  the  reasons  he  gives  are  not 
conclusive.     For  Freawine  see  Grimm,  trans.  Stallybrass,  i,  211. 

3  Ltg.  i,  1,  159. 


Stories  iknmvn  to  Widsith :  Tales  of  the  Sea-folk    93 

attacked  Athislus,  bidding  his  brother  stand  aside,  "for  the  men 
of  old  time  held  it  unjust  and  scandalous  for  two  men  to  fight 
against  one,  and  counted  such  a  victory  as  a  disgrace."  Athislus 
for  some  time  held  back,  bidding  the  two  youths  come  on 
together ;  till  the  vigour  of  Keto's  attack  compelled  him  to  put 
forth  his  full  strength,  and  he  struck  him  to  his  knees.  Then 
Wigo  "  made  affection  conquer  shame  "  and  interfered  to  save 
his  brother:  and  together  they  slew  Athislus. 

Now  we  have  much  information,  half  legendary,  half  historic1, 
about  the  kings  of  Sweden,  dating  from  the  days,  three  centuries 
earlier  than  Saxo,  when  Thiotholf  the  scald  made  his  Ynglinga- 
tal  for  king  Rognvald  Higher-than-the-Hills.  But  we  know 
of  one  Swedish  king  alone  named  Athils,  the  son  of  Ottar  (the 
Eadgils,  son  of  Ohthere,  of  Beowulf),  who  gained  the  king 
dom  by  the  rout  of  Ali  (Onela)2  and  whose  dealings  with  Rolf 
Kraki  (Hrothulf)  were  such  a  favourite  subject  of  Scandina 
vian  story3. 

But  this  Athislus-Eadgils  cannot  be  the  Athislus  who  was 
slain  by  Keto  and  Wigo :  for  our  authorities  are  agreed  that  he 
died,  not  in  fight,  but  whilst  celebrating  a  ceremony : 

King  Athils  was  at  a  sacrifice  of  the  goddesses,  and  rode  his  horse 
through  the  hall  of  the  goddesses  :  the  horse  tripped  under  him,  and  fell, 
and  threw  the  king  ;  and  his  head  smote  a  stone  so  that  the  skull  broke, 
and  the  brains  lay  on  the  stones,  and  that  was  his  death.  He  died  at 
Uppsala,  and  there  was  laid  in  mound,  and  the  Swedes  called  him  a 
mighty  king4. 

Since  there  is  no  other  Swedish  king  of  the  name,  Saxo 
must  be  wrong  in  supposing  the  king  Athislus  who  was  slain 
by  Wigo  to  have  been  a  Swede.  But  in  that  case  he  is  most 
probably  identical  with  Eadgils,  lord  of  the  Myrgings,  in 
Widsith.  For  the  Myrgings,  we  gather  from  Widsith,  were 
probably  also  called  Swcefe5,  and,  in  view  of  the  frequent 

1  Chronologically  the   Ynglingatal  is  remarkably  consistent.     Cf.  Heusler, 
Zeitrechnung  im  Beowulfepos  in  Herrig's  Archiv,  cxxiv,  9. 

2  Beowulf  2392  etc.    Ynglingasaga  in  Heimskringla,  i,  29.     Sn.  Edda,  Skald. 
41  (44),  udg.  Jdnsson  p.  108. 

3  Hrolfs  Kraka  saga,  especially  cap.  28  etc. ;  Heimskringla,  Sn.  Edda,  as 
above ;  Saxo  n  (ed.  Holder,  pp.  54-5). 

4  Heimskringla  i,  29.     Saxo  has  a  different  account.     Athislus  brought  on 
his  own  death  through  celebrating,  with  immoderate  drinking,  the  funeral  of 
his  enemy  Eoluo  (Book  in ;   ed.  Holder,  p.  75). 

5  See  note  to  1.  44. 


94  Widsith 

mediaeval  confusion  of  Sweden  and  Swabia,  a  king  of  the 
Swaefe  is  most  likely  of  all  men  to  have  been  made  into  a  king 
of  Sweden.  Besides,  no  other  Athils-Eadgils  is,  so  far  as 
I  know,  forthcoming  to  contest  this  place  with  Eadgils  the 
Myrging1.  But  if  Old  English  tradition  represented  the  Eadgils 
slain  by  Wig  as  a  Myrging,  and  Offa  as  defending  his  country 
against  an  attack  of  the  Myrgings,  it  becomes  highly  probable 
that  the  two  stories  were  even  more  closely  connected  than  we 
find  them  in  Saxo.  Eadgils  the  Myrging  slays  Freawine,  an 
Anglian  chief:  Ket  and  Wig  avenge  their  father:  Offa  repels 
the  avenging  Myrgings  and  restores  the  honour  of  the  Angles 
by  his  duel  at  Fifeldor. 

This  story  is  probably  based  upon  events  which  actually 
happened  in  the  later  half  of  the  fourth  century  of  our  era2. 

Much  further  back  than  this  we  can  hardly  trace  English 
history.  Wermund's  father  is  Wihtla3g  in  the  O.E.  genealogies, 
Vigletus  in  Saxo :  these  may  be  identical,  and  point  to  some 
hero  of  history  or  legend.  Beyond  WihtlaBg  we  have  only 
Woden  in  the  English  genealogy.  Saxo  makes  Vigletus  slay 
Hamlet,  and  wed  Hamlet's  wife ;  but  we  have  no  evidence  that 
this  Jutish  saga  was  known  in  England. 

1  That  the  Athislus  of  Saxo  (Book  iv)  is  identical  with  the  Eadgils  of 
Widsith  seems  of  recent  years  to  have  occurred  independently  to  at  least  three 
scholars :  Sarrazin  in  Engl.  Stud,  xxiu,  234 ;  Chadwick  (135) ;  Weyhe  in  Engl. 
Stud,  xxxix,  37.     Sarrazin  and  Chadwick  both  point  out  how  easy  and  how 
frequent  is  the  confusion  of  Swedes  and  Swabians.    But  the  identification  of 
the  Athislus  of  Saxo  with  the  Eadgils  of  Widsith,  and  of  the  Swedes  of  Saxo  with 
the  Swcefe  of  Widsith,  was  first  proposed  at  least  sixty  years  ago  (by  P.  A. 
Munch,   Det  norske  Folks  Historic,  1851,  i,  1,  244). 

2  For  this  date  Chadwick  (p.  136)  relies  largely  upon  Widsith,  which  represents 
Eadgils  as  a  contemporary  of  Ermanaric  (died  c.  375).    But  Widsith  equally 
represents  him  as  a  contemporary  of  Alboin  (died  c.  573)  and  on  this  ground 
Eadgils  used  to  be  placed  with  equal  confidence  in  the  sixth  century.    In  fact, 
no  chronological  arguments  can  be  safely  drawn  from  Widsith.    However,  as 
Chadwick  points  out,  if  we  reckon  the  generations  back  from  the  earliest  figures 
which  we  can  date  in  the  Mercian  and  West  Saxon  pedigrees,  allowing  thirty 
years  for  a  generation,  we  should  have  to  put  the  birth  of  Wig  c.  350,  and  that 
of  Offa  c.  360.     This  would  agree  excellently  with  the  story  in  Saxo.    The  West 
Saxon  pedigree  is  not  reliable,  but  the  Mercian  probably  is,  and  similar  results 
have  been  drawn  from  it  by  Mullenhoff,  (Beovulf,  85-6.) 


Stories  known  to  Widsiih :  Tales  of  the  Sea-folk    95 

The  tale  of  Wade. 
Wada  [weold]  Hcelsingum. 

Perhaps  Wade  was  originally  a  sea-giant,  dreaded  and 
honoured  by  the  coast  tribes  of  the  North  Sea  and  the  Baltic1. 
That  he  retained  something  of  this  character  in  these  regions 
till  the  thirteenth  century  is  proved  by  the  references  to  him 
in  the  Thidreks  saga,  where  the  giant  Vathe  is  the  offspring  of 
King  Villcinus  and  of  a  sea-wife.  The  saga  has,  however, 
little  to  tell  concerning  him ;  he  owes  his  place  in  the  story  to 
his  being  the  father  of  the  more  interesting  Weland :  a 
connection  which  is  no  doubt  late.  On  one  occasion  "  a  kind 
of  heathen  Christopher  "  he  wades  over  the  swollen  sound  with 
his  son  upon  his  shoulder2.  Vathe  is  finally  overwhelmed  in 
an  avalanche3.  Perhaps  we  may  see  in  this  a  survival  of  some 
legend  of  the  storm-divinity. 

We  meet  with  Wade  again  in  a  High-German  disguise  in 
the  poem  of  Kudrun,  almost  contemporary  with  the  Thidreks 
saga.  Here  he  has  been  brought  into  subjection  to  the  laws 
of  chivalry,  and  becomes  the  type  of  the  faithful  retainer,  but 
his  old  aquatic  habits  peep  forth.  To  him  the  ways  of  the  sea4 
and  the  tales  of  the  sea5  are  known  :  and  when  the  angel  tells 
Kudrun  that  her  deliverers  are  at  hand,  it  is  Wade  who  steers 
the  fleet  which  brings  them  : 

dir  kumet  in  ditze  lant 

Wate  von  den  Stiirmen ;  der  hat  an  slner  hant 
ein  starkez  stiurruoder6. 

In  England  the  memory  of  Wade  lived  longer  than  that  of 
any  of  the  old  heroes  of  song,  Weland  only  excepted.  The 
references  to  him  by  the  two  greatest  writers  of  the  Middle 
English  period  have  kept  his  name  from  being  ever  quite 

1  Miillenhoff  in  Z.f.  d.  A.  vi,  62;  Symons  in  Pauls  Grd.(3)  in,  718-9.     It 
is  not  necessary,  with  Miillenhoff,  to  assume  a  Frisian  or  Prankish  origin  for 
Wade  ;  evidence  would  rather  lead  to  our  placing  both  him  and  his  people  on 
the  Baltic,  very  near  the  old  Anglian  home.     See  note  to  Hcelsingas,  1.  22,  and 
cf.  Golther,  176. 

2  cap.  58.  3  cap.  60. 

«  Stanza  836.  8  1128.  •  1183. 


96  Widsith 

forgotten.     In  Chaucer's  Troilus  a  "  tale  of  Wade "  helps  to 
while  away  an  evening,  when  Pandare  entertains  Criseyde1 : 

And  after  semper  gonnen  they  to  ryse 
At  ese  wel,  with  hertes  fresshe  and  glade, 
And  wel  was  him  that  coulde  best  devyse 
To  lyken  hir,  or  that  hir  laughen  made. 
He  song ;  she  pleyde  ;  he  tolde  tale  of  Wade. 

Elsewhere  Chaucer  refers  to  Wade's  boat2. 
In  Mallory's  Morte  d' Arthur  the  damsel  Li  net  says  to  Sir 
Gareth  of  Orkney: 

For  were  thou  as  wight  as  ever  was  Wade,  or  Launcelot,  Tristram,  or 
the  good  knight  Sir  Lamorake,  thou  shalt  not  pass  a  pass  here,  that  is 
called  the  pass  perilous3. 

References  in  less  famous  works  are  fairly  frequent.  Sir 
Bevis  of  Hamton  classes  Wade  amongst  the  few  champions  of 
romance  who  have  slain  their  dragons4.  We  shall  probably  be 
right  if  we  regard  this  dragon  episode5  as  a  later  development 
of  his  story. 

In  the  alliterative  Morte  Arthure  the  "  wery  wafulle  wedowe  " 
warns  King  Arthur  that  it  is  useless  for  him  to  attack  the 
giant  : 

Ware  thow  wyghttere  thane  Wade  or  Wawayne  owthire, 
Thow  wynnys  no  wyrchipe,  I  warne  the  before6. 

Even  in  1598,  when  Speght  edited  Chaucer,  the  name  of 
Wade's  boat  was  remembered: 

Concerning  Wade  and  his  bote  called  Guingelot,  as  also  his  strange 
exploits  in  the  same,  because  the  matter  is  long  and  fabulous,  I  passe  it 
over7. 

Speght   has   been   denounced   by   Tyrwhitt8,   and   by   Sir 

1  Bk  m,  1.  614,  ed.  Skeat.    For  further  notes  on  Wade,  see  Grimm,  Kl. 
Schr.  vni,  502,  Kemble,  Saxons,  i,  419-20.     The  suggestion  made  by  Kemble  in 
his  footnote  is  quite  untenable. 

2  Marchantes  Tale,  180  (T.  9298). 

3  Book  vii,  cap.  EC. 

4  Sire  Launcelet  de  Lake, 
He  faugt  wi\>  a  fur  drake, 
And  Wade  dede  also. 

Sir  Beues  of  Hamtoun,  ed.  Kolbing,  E.E.T.S.  2603-5. 
B  Of.  Binz  in  P.B.B.  xx,  197  ;  Panzer  H.G.  289. 

6  Ed.  Brock,  E.E.T.S.  1865.    Another  reference  to  the  romance  of  Wade 
will  be  found  quoted  in  Warton's  History  of  English  Poetry,  1774,  vol.  i,  p.  120. 

7  The  Workes  of  Chaucer,  1598.     Annotations. 

8  Tyrwhitt's  Canterbury  Tales,  W.  Pickering,  1830,  iv,  248. 


Stories  known  to  Widsith :  Tales  of  the  Sea-folk    97 

Walter  Scott,  for  having  "  to  the  great  prejudice  of  posterity" 
given  us  only  this  tantalizing  reference.  But  probably  he  knew 
little  of  the  story.  He  wrote  more  than  a  century  after  the 
latest  of  the  references  given  above,  and  it  is  unlikely  that, 
except  locally,  any  tale  of  Wade  was  remembered,  in  the 
year  1600.  To  the  antiquary  Leland,  much  earlier,  the  name 
Wade  had  no  meaning.  Leland  notes  that  at  Mulgrave,  near 
Whitby,  are  "  certen  stones  communely  caullid  Waddes  Grave, 
whom  the  people  there  say  to  have  bene  a  Gigant2."  Camden 
also,  a  contemporary  of  Speght,  visited  Wade's  grave,  but  the 
name  does  not  seem  to  have  awakened  in  him  any  recollection 
of  old  tradition.  He  connects  the  eleven  foot  high  giant  with 
the  historic  Northumbrian  chief  named  Wade3.  Finally,  Sir 
Francis  Kynaston,  in  his  commentary  upon  Troilus(c.  1635),  pro 
fessed  to  give  an  account  of  Wade,  which  shows  that  he  could 
find  nothing  to  add  to  what  Speght  had  condescended  to  state : 

Tale  of  Wade,  &c.  Chaucer  means  a  ridiculous  romance,  as  if  he  had 
told  a  story  of  Kobin  Hood,  for  in  his  time  there  was  a  foolish  fabulous 
Legend  of  one  Wade  &  his  boate  Guingelot,  wherein  he  did  many  strange 
things  &  had  many  wonderfull  adventures ;  not  much  unlike  that  man  and 
his  boate  in  our  time,  who  layed  a  wager,  that  he  never  going  out  of  his 
boate,  &  without  any  other  helpe  but  himselfe,  he  would  in  a  certaine 
number  of  dayes  go  by  land  &  by  water  from  Abington  to  London,  &  in 
his  passage  would  go  over  the  top  of  a  square  Steepel  by  the  way,  which 
thing  he  performed  &  wonne  his  wager4. 

It  is  evident,  then,  that  by  the  early  seventeenth  century 
the  tale  of  Wade  was  forgotten. 

Locally,  Wade's  name  was  remembered  much  later.  At 
Mulgrave  the  grave  of  the  giant  Wade  was  shown,  almost  down 
to  our  days.  Also,  says  an  antiquary  of  the  late  eighteenth 
century : 

The  common  people... shew... a  huge  bone  which  they  affirm  to  be 
one  of  the  ribs  of  Bell  Wade's  cow  ;  believing  her,  as  well  as  her  owner,  to 

1  Lay  of  the  Last  Minstrel,  note  2  E.    Compare  Scott's  introduction  to  Sir 
Tristrem,  1804,  p.  Ixi  (1806,  p.  Iviii). 

2  Leland's  Itinerary,  second  edit.,  Hearne,  1745,  i,  60. 

3  Hie  in  colle  inter  duo  saxa  solida  septem  plus  minus  pedes  alta  tumulatur, 
quae  cum  vndecem  pedibus  distarent  ilium  gigantea  fuisse  mole  non  dubitant 
affirmare.    Britannia,  Londini,  1594,  p.  555.     See  Gough's  Camden  for  further 
notices  of  Wade,  especially  "  Wades  gap." 

4  This  commentary  has  never  been  published.     The  extract  above  is  taken 
from  The  Loves  of  Troilus  and  Creseid,  written  by  Chaucer ;  with  a  commentary, 
by  Sir  Francis  Kinaston:  never  before  published  [edited  by  F.  G.  Waldron]  1796. 
Only  the  first  part  was  issued. 

c.  "  7 


98  Widsiih 

have  been  of  an  enormous  size.  But  to  me  this  appeal's  a  mere  fiction ; 
for  the  bone  now  preserved  there  has  doubtless  belonged  to  some  fish, 
probably  a  whale ;  though  such  a  suggestion  is  by  no  means  agreeable  to 
its  present  possessors1. 

The  name  of  "  Wade's  causey "  was  also  given  to  a  disused 
Roman  road 

which  leads  from  it  [the  village  of  Dunsley,  on  the  sea  coast]  many  miles 
over  these  vast  moors  and  morasses  toward  York.  This  extraordinary  road, 
at  present  disused,  is  called  by  the  country-people  Wade's  causey,  concerning 
which  they  relate  a  ridiculous  traditional  story  of  Wade's  wife,  and  her 
cow.  The  fabulous  story  is,  that  Wade  had  a  cow,  which  his  wife  was 
obliged  to  milk  at  a  great  distance,  on  these  moors ;  for  her  better  con 
venience  he  made  this  causeway,  and  she  helped  him  by  bringing  great 
quantities  of  stones  in  her  apron ;  but  the  strings  breaking  once  with  the 
weight,  as  well  they  might,  a  huge  heap  (about  twenty  cartload)  is  shown 
that  dropped  from  her2. 

Such  is  the  last  echo,  on  the  Yorkshire  coast,  of  the  tales  of 
the  dread  sea  giant  which  the  conquerors  had  brought  with 
them  across  the  North  Sea  thirteen  centuries  before. 

The  name  Wade  was  frequently  borne  in  Old  English  times 
by  historic  chiefs3.  We  cannot  therefore  feel  sure  that  the 
many  places  associated  with  the  name4  all  point  to  a  localization 
of  stories  of  the  mythical  hero.  It  is  particularly  tempting  to 
assume  this,  however,  when  we  find  the  name  associated  with 
mills  and  bridges6. 

Of  the  lost  Tale  of  Wade  six  lines  were  discovered  by  Dr 
Montague  R.  James  in  a  Latin  sermon  on  Humility,  of  the 
early  thirteenth  century.  As  emended  and  explained  by  Prof. 
Gollancz,  they  run : 

2ta  quod  dicere  possunt  cum  Wade: 
Summe  sende  ylues 
and  summe  sende  nadderes  : 
summe  sende  nikeres 
the  bi  den  watere  wunien. 
Nister  man  nenne 
bute  Ildebrand  onne6. 

The    allusion    to    nickers    dwelling    by  the    water    seems 

1  The  History  of  Whitby,  by  Lionel  Charlton,  York,  1779,  p.  40. 

3  The  hittory  and  antiquities  of  Scarborough  and  the  vicinity,  by  Thomas 
Hinderwell,  second  edit.,  York,  1811,  p.  19. 

8  About  a  dozen  Wades  are  recorded  in  Searle's  Onomasticon. 

4  For  a  list  of  these  see  Binz  in  P.B.B.  xx,  198. 

8  For  instances  of  these  see  Francesque  Michel,  Wade,  Lettre  sur  une 
tradition  angloise  du  moyen  age,  Paris  et  Londres,  1837.  For  German  examples 
of  Wade  in  place  names,  Watanbrunno,  etc.,  see  Mullenhoff  in  Z.f.d.A.  vi,  65. 

6  See  Academy,  1241,  Feb.  1896,  p.  137;  Athenaum,  3565,  Feb.  1896,  p.  254. 


Stories  known  to  Widsiih :  Tales  of  the  Sea-folk    99 

appropriate  to  the  tale  of  Wade.  But  this  reading  is  con 
jectural,  and  the  lines  still  leave  us  in  the  dark  as  to  Wade 
and  his  boat  Guingelot. 

Perhaps  more  help  is  to  be  got  from  the  story  of  Gado, 
told  us  by  Walter  Map1. 

Qado  was  the  son  of  the  king  of  the  Vandals ;  but,  from  love  of 
adventure,  left  his  home  when  a  boy.  A  mighty  hunter,  versed  in  all 
knowledge,  he  wandered  through  the  world  redressing  wrongs,  and  at  last 
he  came  to  the  court  of  King  Offa,  the  builder  of  the  Welsh  dyke.  Offa, 
to  his  sorrow,  wedded  the  daughter  of  the  Koman  emperor ;  his  covetous 
Eoman  guests,  returning  home,  urged  the  emperor  to  make  Offa  tributary, 
and  were  deterred  from  attacking  him  only  by  fear  of  his  friend  Gado. 
However,  when  Gado  was  called  off,  to  right  wrongs  in  the  furthest  Indies, 
and  had  been  dismissed  by  Offa  with  rich  gifts,  the  Romans,  with  a  mighty 
army,  attacked  Offa  unawares.  But  Gado,  having  righted  things  in  India, 
was  returning  to  his  native  land :  when  against  his  wish,  his  ship  was 
carried  to  England,  near  Colchester.  There  Offa  had  come  to  meet  the 
Romans,  who  had  just  landed,  and  who  had  refused  his  terms  of  peace. 
After  greeting  Offa,  Gado,  clothed  in  his  wonted  glorious  vestments,  and 
accompanied  by  a  hundred  chosen  knights  (for  he  always  led  with  him  at 
least  a  hundred),  went  to  the  Roman  quarters  to  act  as  mediator,  but  was 
repulsed.  So  Gado  arrayed  the  English  forces,  placing  Offa  with  the  main 
body  in  the  market  place  of  the  town,  the  king's  nephew  Suanus  with  a 
chosen  five  hundred  at  one  exposed  gate,  and  himself,  with  his  hundred, 
at  the  next. 

Fearing  Gado,  the  Romans  concentrated  all  their  attacks  upon  Suanus, 
who,  at  the  third  assault,  had  to  appeal  to  Gado  for  help.  But  Gado 
refused,  and  Suanus  was  preparing  to  sell  his  life  dearly,  when  Gado 
commanded  him  to  draw  back.  He  obeyed:  the  enemy  rushed  in,  and 
were  met  by  Offa  in  the  market  place,  whilst  their  retreat  was  cut  off  by 
Gado  from  behind.  Thus  caught,  the  Romans  were  mowed  down,  till 
quarter  was  offered  to  the  survivors,  who  returned  to  Rome  with  their 

Map  has  rationalized  the  story,  and  has  toned  down,  without 
obliterating,  its  supernatural  features.  The  boat  which  enables 
Gado  to  go  to  the  uttermost  Indies,  to  accomplish  his  adventure 
there,  and  to  return  in  time  to  thwart  the  emperor,  a  boat  which 
carries  him  magically  to  the  spot  where  there  is  work  for  him  to 
do,  can  be  no  other  than  Guingelot.  Gado's  wisdom,  and  his  white 
hair8  (characteristics  which  are  also  preserved  in  Kudruri),  are 
probably  derived  from  the  original  figure  of  the  dreaded  old 

1  De  nugis  curialium,  ed.  Wright,  Camden  Soe.,  1850,  n,  17.  The  parallel 
has  been  pointed  out  by  Miss  Rickert  in  Mod.  Philol.  n  (1905),  and  by  Brandl 
in  Herrigs  Archiv,  cxx,  6,  and  Pauls  Grdr.fa)  u,  1,  1085. 

3  Compare  Omnem  enim  habere  sapientiam  aiebant,  linguat  quorumlibet 
loquebatur  regnorum,  et  frequenti  felicitate  successuum  totius  vitee  videbatur 
obedientiam  obtinere,  tanquam  optioni  suce  parerent  animantia  omnium  motabilium, 
et  haberent  intelligentiam,  with  the  thrice  repeated  formula  Wate  der  vil  wise  ; 
respersum  cants  quati  semicanum  with  swie  grit  er  do  ware. 

7—2 


100  Widsiih 

man  of  the  sea.  In  other  points  the  coincidence  between  the 
Anglo-Latin  and  the  High  German  story  may  be  accidental. 
The  glorious  clothing  of  Gado  and  his  companions  astonishes  the 
emperor  and  his  knights ;  we  are  reminded  of  the  magnificence 
of  Wate's  companions  at  the  Irish  court ;  when  Gado  takes  over 
the  command  from  king  Offa  and  directs  all  the  fighting  around 
the  town  gates,  we  are  reminded  of  the  similar  commanding 
part  assumed  by  Wate  at  the  end  of  the  Kudrun  story. 

That  Gado  should  be  the  son  of  a  Vandal  king  carries  us 
back  to  the  flourishing  days  of  the  Old  English  heroic  story, 
when  the  Vandal  name  was  clearly  remembered ;  this  feature 
would  hardly  have  been  invented  later.  It  was  probably  the 
exigencies  of  alliteration  that  originally  caused  a  Vandal  king 
to  be  chosen  for  Wade's  father,  just  as  in  the  Thidreks  saga  he 
is  made  the  son  of  king  Villcinus. 

Putting  together,  then,  the  accounts  of  Wate  and  Vathe,  of 
Wade  and  of  Gado,  we  find  these  common  characteristics,  which 
we  may  assume  belonged  to  their  ancient  prototype,  Wada 
of  the  Haelsingas: 

(1)  Power  over  the  sea. 

(2)  Extraordinary  strength — often  typified  by  superhuman 
stature. 

(3)  The  use  of  these  powers  to  help  those  whom  Wade 
favours.     Not  that  he  is   necessarily  gracious   or  benevolent. 
Originally  he  was  perhaps  the  reverse1.     But  probably  he  grew 
out  of  the  figure,  not  of  a  historic  chief,  but  of  a  supernatural 
power,  who  had  no  story  all  his  own,  and  who  interested  mortal 
men  only  when  he  interfered  in  their  concerns.     Hence  he  is 
essentially  a  helper  in  time  of  need :    and  we  may  be  fairly 
confident   that   already   in   the  oldest  lays  he  possessed   this 
character. 

Hagena  and  Heoden. 

Hagena  [weold]  Holmrygum  and  Heoden  Glommum. 
In  these  words  we  have  a  reference  to  one  of  the  greatest 

1  This  sinister  character  he  keeps  in  the  Thidreks  saga ;  cf .  Harm  var  illr 
vtiSrskiptis,  oc  firir  j>a  scee  var  hann  o\>ockas<ell.  Wate,  too,  has  something 
of  this  grim  nature. 


Stories  known  to  Widsith :   Tales  of  the  Sea-folk  101 

of  the  old  tales :  a  tale  so  popular  that  allusions  to  it  are  to 
be  found  everywhere,  and  that  four  complete,  although  late, 
versions  have  come  down  to  us. 

The  best  of  these  is  the  Icelandic  version  as  given  by 
Snorri1,  in  explanation  of  the  allusions  of  the  poets: 

A  battle  is  called  the  blast  or  shower  of  the  Hjathningar  [O.E. 
Heodeningas],  and  arms  the  fire  or  wands  of  the  Hjathningar,  and  there 
is  a  tale  as  to  this. 

The  king  named  Hogni  [O.E.  Hagena]  had  a  daughter  named  Hild ; 
the  king  named  Hethin  [0.  E.  Heoden]  son  of  Hjarrandi  [0.  E.  Heor- 
renda]  carried  her  off  by  force.  At  that  time  Hogni  was  gone  to  a  meeting 
of  chieftains,  but  when  he  heard  that  his  kingdom  had  been  raided,  and 
his  daughter  carried  off,  he  went  with  his  company  in  search  of  Hethin, 
and  learnt  that  he  had  gone  North,  coasting  the  land.  And  when  king 
Hogni  reached  Norway  he  learned  that  Hethin  had  sailed  West,  over 
the  sea.  Then  Hogni  sailed  after  him  to  the  Orkneys  ;  and  when  he  came 
to  the  island  called  Hoy,  Hethin  was  there,  with  his  company. 

Then  Hild  went  to  meet  her  father  and  offered  him  a  necklace 2  as  a 
peace  offering,  on  behalf  of  Hethin.  But  on  the  other  hand  she  said  that 
Hethin  was  ready  to  fight,  and  Hogni  need  expect  no  forbearance  from 
him.  Hogni  made  answer  sternly  to  his  daughter :  but  she,  returning  to 
Hethin,  told  him  that  Hogni  would  have  no  peace,  and  bade  him  prepare 
himself  for  battle.  And  so  they  did  on  both  sides ;  they  went  up  on 
to  the  island,  and  drew  up  their  companies. 

Then  Hethin  called  to  Hogni,  his  father-in-law,  and  offered  him 
peace,  and  much  gold  in  atonement.  But  Hogni  made  answer,  "  Too  late 
dost  thou  proffer  peace,  seeing  that  I  have  now  drawn  Dainsleif,  which  the 
dwarfs  smithied :  and  it  must  be  the  death  of  a  man  every  time  it  is 
drawn,  nor  does  it  ever  fail  in  its  stroke,  nor  may  a  scratch  from  it  be 
healed."  Then  said  Hethin  :  "  There  thou  dost  boast  of  thy  sword,  but 
not  of  the  victory :  I  call  that  good  which  is  true  to  its  lord." 

Then  they  began  the  battle,  which  is  called  Hjathningavig  ;  and  they 
fought  all  the  day,  and  in  the  evening  the  kings  went  to  their  ships. 
But  Hild  went  by  night  to  the  corpses,  and  awoke  the  dead  by  magic. 
And  the  next  day  the  kings  went  to  the  battlefield  and  fought,  and  so  did 
all  those  who  fell  the  day  before. 

In  such  wise  the  battle  continued,  day  after  day ;  so  that  all  those  who 
fell3,  and  all  the  weapons  and  shields  which  lay  on  the  battlefield,  were 
turned  into  stone.  And  when  it  dawned,  all  the  dead  men  stood  up  and 
fought,  and  all  the  weapons  were  sound :  and  it  is  told  in  songs  that  the 
Hjathningar  shall  so  abide  till  Doomsday.  And  of  this  tale  Bragi  the 
poet  wrought  in  the  song  of  B&gnar  Lodbrok. 

This  is  the  same  song  of  Bragi  which  is  our  oldest  Norse 
authority  for  the  tale  of  Ermanaric4.  We  must  not,  however, 
argue  that  the  Hild  story  was  known  to  Bragi  in  the  ninth 
century  exactly  as  Snorri  tells  it  in  the  thirteenth.  The 
references  in  the  Hdttalykill  of  Rognvald,  earl  of  the  Orkneys, 

1  Sn.  Edda,  udg.  J6nsson,  SkdldsLaparmdl,  47  (50). 

9  Beading,  with  J6nsson,  men  at  scett.     But  cf.  Panzer,  H.G.  160. 

8  Cf.  -Panzer,  H.G.  160  (footnote  2).  4  See  above,  pp.  19-20. 


102  Widsith 

which  are  much  nearer  to  Snorri's  time  than  Bragi's  references, 
show  a  version  of  the  story  not  quite  consistent  with  Snorri's, 
and  in  the  Sorlathdttr1  the  tale  is  told  again  with  many 
additional  details,  not  all  of  them  to  be  attributed  to  the 
fourteenth  century  compiler. 

But,  however  they  may  differ  in  detail,  all  these  Norse 
versions  bear  a  common  stamp2.  In  them  all  the  essential 
feature  is  the  tragic  fight  between  father-in-law  and  son-in-law, 
following  a  vain  attempt  at  reconciliation.  How  Hethin  gained 
the  love  of  Hild  we  are  not  told8. 

But  at  the  same  time  that  Snorri  was  writing  his  "poets' 
manual "  in  Iceland,  the  story  was  being  made  the  theme  of  epic 
song  in  Austria.  In  this  southern  version  the  essential  part  of 
the  tale  is  the  wooing  of  Hild :  the  battle  between  father-  and 
son-in-law,  which  follows,  ends  in  a  reconciliation.  Two  striking 
features  of  the  High  German  epic  are  the  griesly  old  warrior 
Wate  [Wade],  the  irresistible  servant  and  protector  of  Hetel 
[the  M.  H.  G.  equivalent  of  Hethin  or  Heoden] ,  and  the  sweet 
song  of  Hdrant,  by  means  of  which  the  love  of  Hild  is  won. 

This  southern  version  is  represented  to  us  by  Kudrun,  a 
High  German  poem  founded  upon  Low  German  tradition.  After 
the  story  of  the  youthful  adventures  of  Hagen — a  later  develop 
ment  of  the  tale — we  are  told  how  Hagen  rules  in  Ireland,  and 
hangs  all  the  messengers  sent  to  beg  for  his  daughter's  hand : 
conduct  which  nevertheless  does  not  check  the  crowd  of  wooers. 

The  wise  men  of  King  Hetel  of  the  Hegelings  counsel  him  to  wed. 
Hetel  consults  his  vassal  Horant  as  to  his  suit  for  Hild  :  only  by  the  help 
of  Wate,  Horant  says,  can  the  lady  be  won.  Wate  is  summoned :  and  it 
is  decided  that  he  and  Horant,  with  other  champions,  shall  sail  in  dis 
guise  to  Ireland,  and  carry  off  the  bride.  They  are  to  feign  themselves 

1  Fornaldar  Sggur,  ed.  Bafn,  i,  389-407,  §§  5-8.    It  is  to  be  noted  that  this 
version  makes  Hogni  and  Hethin  foster  brethren.    Hethin  is  left  in  charge  of 
Hogni's  land :  an  enchanted  drink  causes  him  to  break  his  trust,  murder  Hogni's 
wife,  and  carry  off  his  daughter. 

2  The  versions  and  allusions  were  compiled  by  P.  E.  Muller  in  his  edition  of 
Saxo,  Notce  uberiores  (vol.  n,  pp.  158-61),  and  more  fully  by  Prof.  Piper  in 
his  edition  of  Kudrun  (Anhang  zur  Einleitung,  60-135).     This  collection  does 
not  however  include  the  Hdttatykill,  an  extract  from  which  will  be  found  in 
Panzer,  H.G.  171. 

3  It  must  be  remembered,  however,  that  Snorri  tells  the  story  in  order  to 
illustrate  a  particular  phrase.    He  may  have  known  more  of  the  earlier  part  of 
the  story  than  he  thought  it  worth  while  to  tell. 


Stories  known  to  Widsith:  Tales  of  the  Sea-folk  103 

merchants,  or  else  exiles  outlawed  by  Hetel ;  but  with  armed  men  con 
cealed  in  the  hold.  Both  disguises  are  combined  (the  poet  is  apparently 
harmonizing  two  dissimilar  traditions1) ;  the  magnificent  merchants  are 
invited  to  Hagen's  court.  Wate  excites  first  terror  by  his  grim  appearance, 
then  admiration  by  his  skill  in  swordsmanship.  Equally  admired  is 
Horant's  morning  song,  which  shames  into  silence  the  birds  singing  in  the 
bushes2.  Hild  is  charmed  by  it ;  she  cannot  rest  till  Horant  comes  to  sing 
to  her  in  her  chamber.  So  Horant  sings  a  song  of  Amile" :  the  like  of 
which  was  never  known  by  Christian  man  before  or  since,  unless  he  heard 
it  upon  the  wild  waves. 

Then  he  throws  off  his  disguise  and  woos  for  his  lord.  "  Noble  maid, 
my  lord  has  in  his  court  twelve  who  sing  far  beyond  me  :  and  all  so  sweet 
as  is  their  song,  yet  my  lord  sings  best  of  all." 

The  maiden  is  won,  and  consents  to  flee  with  the  wooers.  So  Wate 
announces  to  Hagen  that  the  ban  has  been  removed,  and  he  and  his 
companions  have  been  summoned  home.  He  asks  the  king  to  do  them 
one  last  favour  by  visiting  their  ships  with  his  daughter  and  his  wife.  The 
wish  is  granted ;  Hild  is  cunningly  separated  from  her  father.  Then  the 
armed  men  spring  up :  anchors  are  weighed,  sails  hoisted  and  the  ad 
venturers  return  to  Hotel's  land ;  whilst  Hagen,  whose  ships  are  unready, 
is  for  the  moment  unable  to  pursue. 

Wate  and  his  companions,  so  soon  as  they  land,  send  news  of  their 
success  to  Hetel,  who  hastens  to  meet  his  bride  :  but  Hagen  soon  arrives 
in  pursuit,  and  a  battle  takes  place  upon  the  shore.  Hagen  wounds  Hetel, 
but  is  himself  wounded  and  hard  pressed  by  Wate :  at  last  Hetel,  at  the 
request  of  Hild,  parts  the  combatants.  Wate,  skilled  in  leechcraft,  heals 
the  wounded,  and  Hagen  returns  to  Ireland,  satisfied  that  his  daughter  is 
worthily  wedded. 

The  subsequent  story  of  Kudrun,  daughter  of  Hild  and 
Hetel,  does  not  concern  us ;  in  many  respects  it  is  a  duplicate  of 
the  story  of  the  wooing  of  Hild. 

A  third  version  of  the  story  is  given  by  Saxo  Grammaticus. 
The  inferiority  of  the  bombastic  Latin  of  Saxo,  that  "very 
curious  Northman,"  to  the  perfect  Icelandic  prose  of  Snorri,  has 
caused  less  attention  to  be  given  to  Saxo's  story  than  it  deserves. 
Chronologically  it  is  the  earliest  of  the  versions,  and  it  has  fine 
features  of  its  own. 

Hithinus,  prince  of  a  Norwegian  tribe,  loved  Hilda,  a  maiden  of 
excellent  renown,  daughter  of  Hoginus,  a  chieftain  of  the  Jutes.  "For 
before  they  had  met  face  to  face,  the  fame  of  each  had  fired  the  other. 
But  when  they  had  an  opportunity  of  beholding  each  other,  neither  was 
able  to  look  away,  so  constant  was  the  love  which  held  their  eyes3." 
Hoginus  betrothed  his  daughter  to  Hithinus,  and  the  two  chieftains 
became  sworn  brethren  :  but  Hithinus  was  falsely  accused  of  having 
betrayed  Hoginus'  daughter.  Hoginus  believed  the  report  and  they  thrice 
met  in  combat.  First  Hoginus  attacked  Hithinus  in  a  pitched  battle,  but 
was  repulsed  :  a  second  time  they  fought  singly,  and  Hithinus  fell, 

1  Panzer,  H.G.  222.  *  Cf.  Kudrun,  st.  389. 

3  Ed.  Holder,  v,  xlviii ;  pp.  159-60. 


104  Widsith 

grievously  wounded  ;  but  pitying  his  beauty  and  youth  his  foe  spared  his 
life  (for  of  old  it  was  held  shameful  to  slay  a  stripling).  So  Hithinus  was 
carried  back  to  his  ship  by  his  men.  After  seven  years  they  met  again  on 
the  island  of  Hithinso,  and  wounded  each  other  mortally.  "  It  is  said  that 
Hilda  burned  with  such  love  for  her  husband  that  by  night  she  raised  up, 
through  spells,  the  spirits  of  the  slain,  to  renew  the  combat." 

It  seems  probable  that  Saxo  is  here  harmonizing  two 
distinct  accounts.  For  whilst  it  is  quite  intelligible  that  the 
sorceress  Hild,  as  depicted  by  Snorri  or  Bragi,  with  her  valkyrie- 
like  love  of  slaughter,  should  renew  the  combat  from  day  to 
day,  it  is  not  clear  why  Saxo's  Hilda  should  do  so,  from  love  for 
Hithinus.  Again,  according  to  Saxo,  it  was  slanderers  who 
caused  the  breach  between  the  chiefs :  Hithinus  is  not  repre 
sented  as  having  forcibly  seized  his  wife,  yet  Saxo  uses  a  phrase 
patre  filiam  pertinacius  reposcente  which  shows  that  he  knew  a 
version  in  which  Hithinus  carried  off  Hilda  by  force.  It  is  even 
possible  that  Saxo,  after  the  manner  of  rationalizing  compilers 
of  all  ages,  is  harmonizing  his  two  sources  by  introducing  the 
same  incident  twice  in  different  forms ;  and  that  in  the  second 
and  third  combats  we  have  traces  of  two  versions,  in  one  of 
which  the  combatants  depart  alive,  reconciled,  whilst  in  the 
other  the  battle  is  renewed  everlastingly1.  But  it  may  well  be 
doubted  whether  any  of  Saxo's  sources  had  other  than  a  tragic 
ending. 

Which,  if  any,  of  these  divergent  versions  preserves  the 
original  tale,  as  it  was  sung  in  the  halls  of  Germanic  chiefs  six 
centuries  before  Snorri  or  Saxo  wrote  ?  Almost  all  students 
have  agreed  that  the  eternal  fight  of  the  Heodenings,  as  told 
in  the  Norse  versions,  is  the  essential  part  of  the  myth2:  that 

1  Axel  Olrik  has  attempted  to  disentangle  the  two  versions  used  by  Saxo. 
The  eternal  battle  he  thinks  is  peculiar  to  the  Norse  version :  the  loves  of 
Hithinus  and  Hilda,  the  slanderous  tongues,  and  the  localization  of  the  last 
fatal  battle  at  Hiddenso,  peculiar  to  the  Danish  tradition.    See  Sakses  Old- 
historic,  u,  191-6. 

2  On  few  points  has  so  much  unanimity  been  shown:  "Ihre  im  wesent- 

lichen  urspriinglichste  Gestalt bietet  Snorri Der  ewige  Kampf,  das  endlose 

Hjaftningavig  ist  offenbar  der  eigentliche  Kern  des  alten  Mythus."     Symons 
in  Pauls  Grdr.(2)  in,  711;  cf.  718,  "Wate  gehb'rt  der  Sage  nicht  urspriinglich 
an."     "In  uralter  Zeit  von  den  das  Meer  beriihrenden  frankischen  Stammen 
ausgebildet  ist  sie...nach  dem  Norden  gewandert  und  dort  wie  so  vieles  andere 
in  ihrem  alten  Zusammenhange  erhalten  geblieben."    Koegel,  Ltg.  i.  1,  170. 
"Der  Hiaftningavig  aber  bildet  den  eigentlichen  Kern  der  Sage."    Martin's 
Kudrwift)  xnv,  XLVH.    "  The  oldest  form  of  the  story  is  to  be  found  in  the  later 
Edda."    Robertson,  History  of  German  Literature  (1902),  p.  72. 


Stories  known  to  Widsith :  Tales  of  the  Sea-folk   105 

the  features  which  distinguish  the  High  German  epic,  such  as 
the  help  given  by  Wate1,  or  the  sweet  song  of  Horant2,  had 
originally  no  connection  with  the  story. 

This  unanimity  is  the  more  extraordinary  in  view  of  the 
fact  that  the  Old  English  allusions  to  the  story,  certainly  the 
oldest  by  many  centuries,  seem  to  incline  rather  to  the  German 
than  to  the  Norse  version.  For  it  is  probably  not  by  a  mere 
coincidence  that  in  Widsith  Wada  is  mentioned  in  the  line 
following  that  devoted  to  Hagena  and  Heoden8.  The  reference 
in  Deor  is  unfortunately  obscure,  but  two  things  are  clear: 
firstly  that  Heorrenda  was  known  to  the  Old  English  poets  as 
a  mighty  singer,  just  as  Horant  later  was  in  Germany :  secondly 
that  this  Heorrenda  was  connected  with  the  Heodenings.  So 
much  we  can  certainly  draw  from  Deor's  words: 

" — of  myself  will  I  say  it :  of  old  I  was  the  poet  of  the  Heodenings, 
dear  to  my  lord,  and  Deor  was  my  name.  For  many  a  year  had  I  a  good 
service  and  a  gracious  lord  :  till  now  Heorrenda,  the  man  cunning  in  song, 
received  the  land-right,  which  of  old  the  lord  of  earls  gave  to  me." 

These  references  seem  to  show  that  Wada  and  Heorrenda 
had  their  part  in  the  Anglian  lay,  just  as  they  had  in  the 
Middle  High  German  epic.  That,  in  spite  of  these  references, 
critics  should  have  insisted  that  Snorri's  well-told  little  tale 
preserved  the  original  version,  is  a  remarkable  testimony  to  the 
power  of  style. 

Breaking  away  from  this  tradition,  Friedrich  Panzer4  saw  the 
germ  of  the  story  not  in  the  eternal  battle,  but  in  those  parts 
which  previous  critics  had  regarded  as  excrescences :  in  the 
loves  of  Hild  and  Heoden,  in  the  supernatural  help  given  to 
the  lover  by  Wade,  in  the  magic  song  of  Heorrenda.  Panzer 
believed  the  story  to  be  of  the  same  origin  as  the  widely  spread 
fairy  tale,  known  to  most  in  the  collections  of  Grimm  and 
Asbiornsen,  but  of  which  as  many  as  seventy-two  variants  have 
been  collected,  sometimes  from  sources  as  remote  as  the  Swahili 
tales  of  Bishop  Steere.  In  this  tale  a  boy,  generally  a  king's 

1  Symons,  p.  713.  2  Symons,  p.  714. 

3  Of  course  it  may  be  a  coincidence :  but  the  chances  are  against  such  a 
coincidence  occurring,  and  we  have  no  right  to  assume  that  it  did. 
«  Hilde-Gudrun,  1901. 


106  Widsith 

son,  falls  into  the  power  of  a  supernatural  being — the  Eisenhans, 
Iron  John,  of  Grimm's  story,  a  wild  man  who  dwells  at  the 
bottom  of  a  lake.  From  him  the  boy  parts  at  length,  having 
acquired  magic  gifts,  generally  including  that  of  hair  of  gold. 
In  rough  disguise,  and  with  head  covered,  he  enters  the  service 
of  a  king,  generally  as  a  gardener ;  gains  the  love  of  the  king's 
daughter,  who  alone  discovers  his  golden  hair ;  and  at  last  weds 
her.  Thanks  to  the  help  of  Iron  John  he  repeatedly  saves  the 
king  from  disaster  in  war,  riding  off  unknown,  and  returning  to 
his  humble  disguise.  But  the  king  is  determined  to  know  who 
the  strange  knight  is,  and  he  or  his  men  intercept  and  wound 
the  hero.  The  king  recognises  from  the  wound  that  the 
despised  lover  of  his  daughter  is  the  same  as  the  strange  knight, 
and  all  ends  well. 

Theories  which  derive  ancient  epics  from  modern  fairy  tales 
ought  to  be  received  with  caution.  To  collect  a  number  of 
stories  in  which  the  same  motive  occurs ;  to  argue  that  they  are, 
in  virtue  of  this  motive,  all  descended  from  one  original ;  to 
reconstruct  this  original,  selecting  an  episode  here  and  a  figure 
there,  till  the  reconstructed  original  assumes  a  likeness,  more  or 
less  remote,  to  some  ancient  epic  or  romance,  to  conclude  there 
fore  that  this  epic  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  literary  elaboration  of 
the  original  fairy  tale — all  this  is  a  process  in  which  the  individual 
feeling  of  the  investigator  counts  for  so  much  that,  though  he  may 
convince  himself,  he  can  hardly  hope  to  convince  others.  Panzer 
has  argued  his  case  with  extraordinary  conviction,  erudition  and 
plausibility,  but  he  has  made  few  converts  to  his  theory. 

It  is  unlikely  that  the  fairy  tale — of  the  age  and  origin  of 
which  we  must  necessarily  remain  quite  uncertain — is  the  source 
of  all  the  numerous  mediaeval  romances  (many  of  them  bearing 
only  a  most  remote  resemblance)  which  Panzer  would  derive 
from  it.  Certain  features  recur  so  repeatedly  in  all  popular  story 
that  a  collection  of  seventy-two  fairy  tales  on  the  one  hand, 
and  half-a-dozen  romances  on  the  other,  may  easily  between 
them  show  many  common  features,  without  its  following  that 
all  the  romances  are  drawn  from  the  prototype  of  the  fairy  tale. 

Perhaps  the  strongest  evidence  against  the  identification 
of  the  story  with  the  fairy  tale  lies  in  the  fact  that  the 


Stories  known  to  Widsifh :  Tales  of  the  Sea-folk   107 

fairy  tale  ends  in  a  reconciliation.  Now  all  the  evidence  of 
Northern  story  points  to  a  tragic  ending:  there  is  nothing  to 
show  that  the  story  in  Old  English  was  not  tragic ;  whilst  the 
oldest  German  reference  is  to  "  the  battle  betwixt  Hagen  and 
Wate,  where  Hild's  father  lay  dead1."  We  can  understand  why 
in  the  later  Middle  High  German  epic  the  fierce  old  version  was 
toned  down ;  but  that  so  many  different  versions  should  have 
agreed  in  turning  an  original  reconciliation  into  a  tragedy  would 
be  almost  incredible. 

But  a  new  light  has  been  thrown  by  Panzer  upon  many 
features  of  the  story — the  daemonic  helper,  the  magic  song  of 
Heorrenda:  these  will  never  again  be  so  hastily  dismissed  as 
later  additions  to  the  tale. 

Above  all,  the  old  English  allusions  receive  from  Panzer's 
study  their  due  place  in  the  history  of  the  development  of  the 
story.  There  was  something  paradoxical  in  the  view  which 
accepted  Snorri's  thirteenth  century  tale  as  the  original  version, 
whilst  condemning  as  secondary  Old  English  references  which 
could  hardly  by  any  possibility  be  put  later  than  the  eighth 
century,  and  were  probably  much  older.  Yet  earlier  critics  had, 
in  spite  of  Widsith,  excluded  Wade  from  the  original  tale.  He 
was  a  mythical  figure,  a  water  giant,  and  had  no  place  in  the 
warfare  of  Heoden  and  Hagena.  It  is  just  because  he  is  a  water 
giant,  Panzer  urges,  that  he  so  obviously  belongs  to  the  story. 
He  is  an  essential  part  of  the  tale,  the  supernatural,  daemonic 
figure  who  helps  the  hero  at  his  need  ;  a  figure  which  agrees 
admirably  with  that  of  the  English  Wade.  Hence  the  help 
given  to  students  by  Panzer's  monograph  can  hardly  be  ex 
aggerated,  even  though  his  view  of  the  origin  of  the  story  has 
not  in  its  entirety  met  with  any  general  acceptance2. 

Whilst  believing  that  Panzer  has  shown  Wada  to  be  a 
much  older  figure  in  the  story  than  has  generally  been  admitted, 

1  von  einen  volcwige  hore  wir  sagen 
der  uf  Widpinwerde  gescach, 

ddr  Hilden  vater  t6t  loch, 

inzwischen  Hagenen  unde  Waten. 

Lamprecht's  Alexander,  herausg.  Kinzel,  Halle,  1885,  1830  (1321).  Compare 
note,  p.  459. 

2  So  far  as  I  know,  Panzer's  view  that  the  Goldener-myth  is  the  origin  of  the 
Hild  and  Heoden  story  has  not  been  endorsed  by  any  critic.    It  has  been 


108  Widsith 

we  need  not  therefore  identify  him  with  "  Iron- John  " :  for  the 
helping  and  protecting  spirit  is  a  figure  common  enough  in  all 
folk-lore,  not  belonging  necessarily  to  this  one  particular  story1. 

In  all  probability  then,  features  of  the  Old  Anglian  lay  were 
the  wooing  of  the  heroine  by  the  magic  song  of  Heorrenda :  the 
help  given  to  the  hero  by  the  terrible  Wada:  and  the  fall 
of  Hagena,  if  not  of  both  Hagena  and  Heoden.  But  we  cannot 
reconstruct  the  story  in  detail  with  any  degree  of  certainty. 

Critics  have  been  influenced  by  the  interest  they  have  felt 
in  the  vernacular  versions  of  Snorri  or  of  the  Kudrun  poet.  Yet 
the  charm  of  these,  great  as  it  is,  is  not  the  same  as  that  of  the 
old  poetry.  It  is  when  we  turn  to  Saxo's  version  that  we  are 
reminded  of  the  great  fragments  which  have  come  down  to 
us  from  the  seventh  and  eighth  centuries.  The  situations  are 
those  of  the  heroic  age.  The  tragedy  of  strife  between  kinsfolk 
and  sworn  brethren,  as  we  find  it  in  Saxo,  was  probably  the 
theme  of  the  old  poet  of  Heoden,  as  it  was  that  of  the  poets  of 
the  lays  of  Finnesburh,  of  Ingeld,  of  Hildebrand,  and,  in  a 
smaller  measure,  of  Waldere. 

In  Widsith  the  story  is  localized  among  the  Haelsingas,  the 
Island-Rugians,  and  the  Glommas.  The  last  we  cannot  identify 
with  any  certainty ;  the  two  former  tribes  almost  certainly 
dwelt,  in  the  fourth  century,  on  the  islands  and  peninsulas  of 
what  is  now  the  Baltic  coast  of  Germany2.  It  should  be  noted 
that  in  Saxo  the  last  fight  takes  place  in  the  Baltic  upon  the 
island  of  Hiddenso,  off  the  coast  of  Riigen.  That  Saxo's  original 
was  localized  among  the  Hselsingas  and  the  Glommas  is 

examined  by  Much  (in  Herrigs  Archiv  filr  das  Studium  der  Neueren  Sprachen, 
cvm,  1902,  395-416);  E.  Martin  (in  the  Deutsche  Litteraturzeitung ,  xxii,  1901, 
2327-30) ;  B.  Symons  (in  the  Litteraturblatt  f.  germ.  u.  roman.  Philol.  xxm, 
1902,  321-8) ;  Ehrismann  (Z.f.d.Ph.  xxxvn,  515),  and  by  an  anonymous  critic 
(in  the  Athenaeum,  No.  3849  ;  1901,  n,  152-3).  All  these  critics  express  dissent, 
Much  and  Ehrismann  in  a  reasoned  statement  of  considerable  length.  But  it 
is  admitted  that  Panzer's  study  has  thrown  a  new  light  upon  the  poem.  "Damit 
sind  auch  nach  meinem  Urteil  einige  Sagenziige  erst  ins  rechte  Licht  geriickt," 
Much,  397;  "Auch  in  dem  zweiten  Teile  hatte...noch  vieles  hervorgehoben 
werden  konnen,  dem  ich  entweder  unbedenklich  oder  doch  bedingt  zustimmen 
kann,"  Symons.  Symons  instances  the  treatment  of  Heorrenda  and  the  dis 
cussion  of  his  original  relation  to  Heoden. 

1  Of.  Ehrismann  in  Z.f.d.Ph.  xxxvn,  521. 

2  See  notes  to  11.  21,  22. 


Stories  known  to  Widsith:  Tales  of  the  Sea-folk   109 

rendered  probable  by  the  fact  that  the  Helsingi,  and  a  roving 
captain  Glomerus1,  are  used  by  Saxo  to  fill  up  the  intervals 
of  the  Hild  story  in  a  strange,  inconsequential  way,  as  if  he 
knew  that  they  had  a  place  in  the  tale,  but  did  not  remember 
what  it  was2. 

Hence,  although  it  has  been  usual  to  regard  the  Hild  story 
as  belonging  to  the  North  Sea3,  its  earliest  home  would  seem  to 
have  been  among  the  islands  of  the  Baltic.  From  these  islands 
its  passage  to  the  adjoining  Angles  was  easy,  and  they  must 
have  brought  it  with  them  to  England.  The  evidence  that 
it  was  known  to  the  Franks  in  the  sixth  century4  is  insufficient5 ; 
and  the  theory  that  it  spread  to  the  Franks  from  Anglian 
settlements  in  the  Netherlands6  depends  upon  the  very  un 
certain  evidence  for  such  settlements.  The  Old  English  allusions 
are  by  far  the  earliest  reliable  documents  which  we  have  for  the 
Hild  story :  and  as  such  their  importance  has  hardly,  in  the 
past,  been  fully  recognised. 

Evidence  points  to  the  story  having  died  out  early  in 
England.  The  earliest  charters  frequently  show  the  signature 
of  an  Abbot  Hagona ;  he  and  the  Abbess  Hild  of  Whitby  both 
belong  to  the  seventh  century.  After  this  date  place-names 
founded  upon  the  Hild  story  are  found  surviving,  but  men  and 
women7  bearing  the  name  Hagana  or  Hild  do  not  meet  us 
till  we  find  the  name  Hagana  reappearing  (owing  probably  to 
Danish  and  Norman  immigration)  after  the  conquest.  Wade 
alone  retains  his  popularity :  but,  it  would  seem,  quite  inde 
pendently  of  the  Hild  story. 

1  This  has  been  noted  by  Panzer  (H.G.  180). 

2  By  the  Helsingi  Saxo  of  course  understands  the  inhabitants  of  Helsingaland 
in  Sweden.    To  justify  a  connection  between  Glomerus  and  the  Glommas  many 
instances  could  be  quoted  for  the  interchange  of  the  names  of  chiefs  and  peoples. 
This  occurs  principally  in  names  ending  in  ing  (cf.  note  to  Hundingum,  1.  23) 
but  we  have  also  Hoftbroddr  and  Heaftobeardan  (cf.  Bugge,  H.D.  153,  and  above, 
p.  82). 

If  the  Glommas  are  to  be  located  near  the  river  Glommen  (see  note  to 
1.  21)  we  have  a  confirmation  of  the  conjecture  of  Dr  Lawrence  that  Heoden  was 
a  Geat  (Mod.  Philol.  ix,  36,  etc.). 

3  Cf.  Koegel,  Ltg.  i,  1,  169 ;  Binz  in  P.B.B.  xx,  192 ;  Symons  in  Pauls 
Grdr.(2)  in,  714. 

4  Panzer,  H.G.  438.  5  Much  in  Herrigs  Archiv,  cvni,  415. 
9  H.G.  440. 

7  See  Binz  in  P.B.B.  xx,  192-6. 


110  Widsith 

Breca,  of  the  Brandings. 
Breoca  weold  Brondingum. 

The  Breoca,  prince  of  the  Brondings,  who  is  mentioned  in  our 
catalogue  of  kings,  is  known  to  us  from  Beowulf  (499 — 606) 
where  Unferth  taunts  Beowulf  with  his  unsuccessful  swimming 
match  with  Breca,  the  son  of  Beanstan1.  Beowulf  asserts  that  he 
was  the  better  swimmer,  and  he  silences  his  opponent  by  personal 
abuse;  but  his  explanation,  that  he  could  have  swum  faster 
than  his  rival,  but  did  not  choose  to  do  so,  seems  insufficient. 
And  Beowulf  nowhere  says  that  Breca  was  defeated  or  humiliated. 
The  poet  has  not  made  the  swimming  match  very  clear.  The 
heroes  are  apparently  swimming  northward.  Breca  after  seven 
nights  reaches  the  land  of  the  Heathoraemas  (in  the  neighbour 
hood  of  the  modern  Christiania).  Beowulf  swims  side  by  side 
with  Breca  for  five  nights,  till  the  flood  drives  them  asunder. 
He  is  attacked  by  the  sea  monsters,  slays  them  [on  the  sixth 
night]  and  sees  in  the  morning  before  him  the  sea-nesses  of  the 
land  of  the  Finns.  This  is  hardly  intelligible  if  we  suppose 
Beowulf  to  have  started  from  his  home  among  the  Geatas.  The 
story  seems  most  naturally  to  belong  to  the  ancient  Angel,  from 
which  both  the  land  of  the  Finns  (Lapps)  and  of  the  Heatho 
raemas  would  alike  lie  in  the  vague  regions  of  the  distant  North. 

The  mention  of  Breca  in  Widsith  justifies  us  in  believing 
that  Breca  had  a  history  of  his  own  as  a  swimmer,  even  though 
the  Beowulf  poet  has  introduced  him  only  as  a  foil  to  his  own 
hero2.  Breca's  name,  and  that  of  his  folk,  point  distinctly  to 
some  sea  story.  Brecan  is  used  in  Old  English  in  the  sense 

1  For  Beanstan  see  Kriiger  in  P.B.B.  ix,  573,  Bugge  in  Z.f.d.Ph.  iv,  198, 
Bugge  in  P.B.B.  xn,  55  ;  Zupitza  in  D.L.Z.  vi,  489-90. 

Miillenhoff  would  connect  with  O.N.  bauni,  another  reference  to  the  sea  and 
to  sea  monsters.  (Z.f.d.A. ,  vn,  421 ;  Beovulf,  2.)  The  word  bauni  has  been 
questioned  (by  J.  M.  Hart  in  M.L.N.  xvin,  118).  It  will  however  be  found 
in  Haldorsen's  Islandske  Lexikon,  Copenhagen,  1814:  "  bauni,  hundefisk"  (a 
dog  fish).  I  owe  this  reference  to  Mr  S.  Blondal,  of  the  Royal  Library, 
Copenhagen. 

s  It  certainly  does  not  justify  us,  with  Koegel  (Ltg.  i,  1, 109),  in  assuming  that 
there  was  an  old  lay  of  Beowulf  and  Breca,  used  by  the  poet  of  Beowulf.  For, 
since  in  Widsith  heroes  of  the  same  cycle  are,  as  far  as  possible,  grouped 
together,  the  absence  of  Beowulf  or  Beowa  here  would  be  difficult  to  explain, 
the  more  so  since  (as  has  been  observed  by  Moller,  V.E.  22)  the  alliteration  is  so 
convenient. 


Stories  known  to  Widsiih:  Tales  of  the  Sea-folk   111 

of  ploughing  the  sea1 :  breki*  signifies  a  breaker  in  Old  Norse 
poetry ;  brandr  in  Old  Norse  means  the  prow  of  a  ship,  whilst 
branding,  branting  has  for  many  centuries  been  in  use  among 
the  sailors  of  the  North  Sea  to  signify  "  a  place  where  the  sea 
dashes  on  the  rocks3." 

We  cannot,  then,  dismiss  as  irrelevant  or  accidental  this  fact 
that  both  prince  and  people  bear  a  name  which  is  reminiscent 
of  the  sea4.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  the  context,  both  in 
Widsith  and  Beowulf,  shows  that  Breca  of  the  Brandings  is 
regarded  there  as  the  real  prince  of  a  real  people,  not  as  a 
mythological  abstraction  of  the  breakers  conquered  by  Beowulf5. 
The  swimming  contest  is  a  favourite  episode  in  Germanic  story, 
and  Brecca  is  as  concrete  an  antagonist  as  was  Olaf  Tryggva- 
son,  when  he  dived  under  water  with  Kjartan,  till  "  Kjartan 
thought  he  had  never  come  in  so  tight  a  place  before." 

In  the  tale  of  Breca  and  his  Brondings  we  have  clearly  some 
tale  of  power  over  the  sea ;  exactly  what  it  is  difficult  to  say. 
It  is  going  too  far  to  see  in  the  story  of  Beowulf  and  Breca  a 
myth  of  the  Gulf  Stream  flowing  North,  and  overcoming  the 
colder  polar  stream6:  for  we  have  no  reason  to  think  that  this 
phenomenon  had  been  observed  so  early7. 

1  "brecan  ofer  bjej>weg,"  Elene,  244,  Andreas,  223,  513,  is  used  of  a  boat 
being  dashed  over  the  waves.  See  Andreas  u.  Elene,  herausg.  v.  J.  Grimm, 
Cassel,  1840,  pp.  109,  147. 

3  The  two  words  come  together  in  the  Edda,  fellr  brattr  breke  brondum 
hcere  (Regensmdl,  17).  "The  steep  billow  surges  high  above  the  prowa"  (Symons 
u.  Gering,  i,  314). 

3  Compare  Dutch  branding,  Danish  branding,  breakers,  surge.    The  use  of 
brandung  in  the  same  sense  in  High  German  is  comparatively  recent.     See 
Kluge,  Seemannssprache,  p.  141.     There  seems  no  reason  (with  Chadwick,  269) 
to  connect  the  Brandings  with  the  Brand  of  the  Northumbrian  pedigree. 

4  This,  and  the  absence  of  any  geographical  data  with  which  we  can  connect 
their  names,  make  it  highly  probable  that  the  Brondings  are  a  poetical  fiction. 
Heyne-Schiicking  (314)  seeks  to  locate  them  in  Mecklenburg  and  Pomerania, 
and  Thorpe  (Cod.  Ex.  514)  in  Branno  in  the  Cattegatt :  but  there  is  no  satis 
factory  evidence  for  either  theory.     This  makes  their  case  different,  for  example, 
from  that  of  the  Halsingas  of  1.  22.     Yet  it  might  be  argued  that  they  were  a 
real  tribe  or  family,  that  the  name  Brondingas  meant  originally  "  men  of  the 
sword  "  like  Helmingas  "helm-men," and  perhaps  originally  Scyldingas,  "  shield- 
men"  (Chadwick,  284),  and  that  they  subsequently  came  to  be  connected  with 
the  hero  of  a  sea  story  through  a  false  etymology. 

8  Cf.  Panzer,  Beowulf,  271 ;  Lawrence  in  the  Pub.  of  the  Mod.  Lang. 
Association  of  America,  xxrv,  262,  269. 

6  Moller,  V.E.  22  (note) ;  cf.  Brandl  in  Pauls  Grdr.(Z)  n,  1,  992. 

7  Heinzel  in  A.f.d.A.  xvi,  266-7. 

For  a  reference  to  a  possible  development  of  the  swimming  match  story 
in  the  Icelandic  sagas,  see  Bugge  in  P.B.B.  xn,  51-5. 


112  Widsith 

Theodoric  the  Frank, 
faodric  weold  Froncum. 

The  Theodric  mentioned  as  ruling  over  the  Franks  is  to  be 
identified  with  Theodoric  I,  the  son  of  Chlodowech  (Clovis), 
who  ruled  over  the  Salian  Franks  from  511  to  534,  the  conqueror 
of  the  Thuringians,  and,  through  his  son  Theodebert,  of  Hygelac 
the  Geat.  And  Theodric,  no  less  than  Hygelac,  has  his  place 
in  heroic  song. 

The  poeta  Saxo  who  wrote  De  gestis  Caroli  magni  toward 
the  end  of  the  ninth  century  makes  mention  of  popular  songs 
in  praise  of  Theodric : 

Est  quoque  iam  notum,  vulgaria  carmina  magnis 
Laudibus  eius  avos  et  proavos  celebrant, 

Pippinos,  Carolos,  Hludowicos  et  Theodricos 
Et  Carlomannos  Hlothariosque  canuut1. 

About  a  century  later  we  have  a  note  concerning  Theo 
doric  I:  Hugo-Theodoricus  iste  dicitur,  id  est  Francus,  quia 
olim  omnes  Frand  Hugones  vocabantur,  a  suo  quodam  duce 
Hugone*.  Another  two  hundred  years  and  we  reach  the  early 
thirteenth  century,  the  great  age  of  German  epic  poetry,  to 
which  period  belongs  the  earliest  portion  of  the  Middle  High 
German  poem  of  Hug-Dietrich  and  Wolf-Dietrich3. 

This  story  is  a  romantic  one :  the  relation  to  the  historic 
events  of  the  sixth  century  is  slight,  and  became  still  slighter 
as  the  tale  was  overlaid,  in  the  days  of  the  decline  of  the  High 
German  epic,  with  wild  tales  of  adventure  among  paynim 
kings.  In  the  name  Dietrich,  and  in  the  fact  that  the  story 
turns  upon  the  suspicion  of  illegitimate  birth,  upon  the  jealousy 
of  brothers,  and  the  loyalty  and  disloyalty  of  retainers,  we  can 
see  the  last  traces  of  traditions  of  the  historic  Merovingian 
kings,  Theodoric  and  Theodebert. 

We  must  be  careful  not  to  read  the  Middle  High  German 
story  into  Widsith,  which  chronologically  stands  much  nearer 

1  De  gestis,  etc.  v.  117,  in  Pertz  (fol.),  SS.  i,  p.  268. 

2  Quedlinburg  Chronicle,  in  Pertz  (fol.),  SS.  ni,  p.  31 ;   see  Schroder  in 
Z.f.d.A.  XLI,  24  etc. 

3  See   Miillenhoff,  Die  Austrasische  Dietrichssage,  in  Z.f.d.A.  vi,  435-59, 
and  the  chapter  Teoderico  e  Teodeberto  in  the  Origini  of  Pio  Rajna. 


Stories  known  to  Widsith:   Tales  of  the  Franks    113 

to  the  days  of  the  historic  Theodoric,  than  to  the  German  epic 
of  the  thirteenth  century.  We  have  seen  that  we  are  not 
justified  in  assuming  that  the  Theodric  and  Seafola  who  are 
mentioned  in  1.  115,  as  retainers  of  Eormanric,  are  the  same  as 
Wolf-Dietrich  and  the  traitor  Sabene1.  The  Theodric  men 
tioned  in  1.  24  is  undoubtedly  Theodoric  the  Frank,  and  there 
fore  ultimately  to  be  identified  with  the  hero  of  the  Wolf- 
Dietrich  story :  but  the  stories  to  which  he  owes  his  mention  in 
Widsith  are  probably  not  those  known  to  us  (in  their  later 
form)  through  the  Middle  High  German  epic  of  Wolf -Dietrich, 
but  rather  the  much  earlier  traditions,  at  least  half  historical, 
of  Theodoric's  conquest  of  the  Thuringians. 

This  event  made  so  strong  an  impression  upon  the  tribes  of 
North  Germany  as  to  form  a  landmark  in  their  annals.  Thus 
the  continental  Saxons,  according  to  a  lost  work  of  Einhard, 
quoted  by  Adam  of  Bremen,  dated  their  origin  from  the  period 
quo  Theodericus,  rex  Francorum,  contra  Hirminfridum,  ducem 
Thuringorum,  generum  suum,  dimicans,  terram  eorum  crudeliter* 
ferro  vastavit  et  igne*.  The  Saxons  according  to  this  story 
helped  Theodoric,  and  received  in  return  settlements  in  the 
old  Thuringian  land.  In  the  fragment  known  as  the  de 
Suevorum  origine3,  the  same  story  is  told  of  the  "  Suevi " ; 
and  the  whole  legend  of  Theodoric's  Thuringian  war,  as  it  was 
current  in  the  second  half  of  the  tenth  century,  is  given  by 
Widukind4. 

This  story  is  quite  dissimilar  from  the  legends  later  asso 
ciated  with  the  names  of  Hug-Dietrich  and  Wolf-Dietrich,  but 
for  one  remarkable  point  of  likeness.  The  true  hero  of  the 
Middle  High  German  epic  is  neither  Hug-Dietrich  nor  Wolf- 
Dietrich,  but  the  faithful  retainer  Berhtunc  von  Meran  :  to  him 
is  opposed  the  faithless  Sabene.  Similarly  Widukind's  story 

1  See  above,  pp.  41-4. 

2  Adam  of  Bremen,  i,  4  in  Pertz  (fol.)  SS.  vn,  285  (1846).     The  same  account 
occurs,  almost  word  for  word,  though  without  mention  of  its  being  taken  from 
Einhard,  in  the  ninth  century  Tramlatio  S.  Alexandri.    Pertz  (fol.)  SS.  n,  674-5 
(1829). 

3  Published,  with  commentary,  by  Mullenhoff  in  the  Z.f.d.A.  xvii,  1874, 
pp.  57-71. 

4  i,   9-13,  in  Pertz   (fol.)  SS.  ni,  420-424.     The  version  given  below  is 
a  paraphrase  and  summary  of  Widukind's  story,  which  is  told  at  too  great 
length  to  be  given  literally. 

o.  8 


114  Widsith 

contrasts  the  figures  of  the  true  and  the  false  servant.  Theodo- 
ric  owes  his  success,  Irminfrid  his  defeat  and  death,  each  to 
the  counsel  of  his  trusted  servant. 

Huga,  king  of  the  Franks,  died,  leaving  no  heir  save  Amalberga,  wedded 
to  Irminfrid,  king  of  the  Thuringians.  The  Franks  anointed  king  Huga's 
bastard  son  Thiadric,  and  he  at  once  sent  a  message  to  Irminfrid  offering 
peace  and  friendship.  Irminfrid  would  have  accepted  Thiadric's  proffer, 
had  not  his  wife,  claiming  that  she  was  heir  to  the  thione,  persuaded  the 
king's  counsellor  Iring  acer  ingenio,  acutus  consilio,  facilis  ad  suadendwm 
quae  vellet,  to  advise  war. 

So,  against  the  will  of  his  chief  nobles,  Irminfrid  replied  that  Thiadric 
was  by  birth  his  bondsman,  and  that  he  would  not  yield  to  him.  "  Rather 
would  I  give  thee  my  head,"  replied  the  messenger,  "than  hear  such 
words,  knowing  that  they  must  be  washed  out  by  the  blood  of  many 
Franks  and  Thuringians." 

So  Thiadric  and  Irminfrid  met ;  and  the  battle  lasted  three  days : 
Irminfrid  was  at  last  beaten  off,  though  with  such  loss  to  Thiadric  that 
retreat  was  advised.  But,  by  the  words  of  one  counsellor,  s&rvus  satis 
ingeniosus,  cujus  consilium  expertus  est  saepius  probum,  eique  propterea 
quadam  familiaritate  conjunctus,  Thiadric  was  urged  to  press  his  beaten 
foe,  which  he  did,  summoning  the  Saxons  to  his  aid.  [The  story  of  how 
the  Saxons  helped  the  Franks  does  not  concern  us  :  in  the  end  Irminfrid 
and  his  Thuringians  were  utterly  routed.]  Iring,  sent  by  Irminfrid  to  beg 
for  mercy,  was  persuaded  by  Thiadric  to  turn  traitor :  to  lure  his  master 
into  the  presence  of  the  Frankish  king,  and  then  to  slay  him,  in  the 
moment  of  making  his  obeisance.  But  the  promised  reward  did  not 
follow.  "  Hateful  to  all  men  for  having  slain  thy  lord,"  cried  Thiadric, 
"  depart  from  us :  we  will  have  neither  part  nor  lot  in  thy  wickedness." 
"  Justly  am  I  hateful  to  all  men,"  Iring  replied,  "  having  yielded  to  thy 
wiles :  but  I  will  purge  my  sin  and  avenge  my  lord."  With  his  still 
unsheathed  sword  he  smote  Thiadric,  and,  having  placed  the  dead  body 
of  his  master  above  that  of  the  Frankish  king,  so  that  he  might  conquer 
even  in  death,  he  cleared  a  way  for  himself,  and  departed.  If  any  faith  is 
to  be  placed  in  this  story,  Widukind  says,  the  reader  must  judge,  but  the 
Milky  way  to  this  day  is  known  by  Iring's  name1. 

The  details  of  this  story  are,  of  course,  fabulous:  but  it 
reflects  accurately  the  character  of  Theodoric,  as  he  is  depicted 
by  Gregory  of  Tours2,  as  well  as  the  fact  that  Irminfrid  was 
slain,  after  his  surrender,  apparently  through  the  treachery  of 
Theodoric. 

Now  both  the  treacherous  Iring  and  the  nameless  faithful 
counsellor  seem  to  belong  to  the  class  of  retainer  known  in  Old 

1  In  the  Quedlinburg  Annals  another  version  of  the  story  is  given,  in  which 
Iring  is   apparently  the   faithful   companion   of  Irminfrid.      See  Pertz  (fol.) 
SS.  m,  32.     In  the  de  Suevorum  origine  Irminfrid  escapes  to  the  court  of 
Attila.      A  version  similar  to   these  must  lie  behind  the  mention    in   the 
Nibelungen  Lied  of  the  two  heroes  Iring  and  Irnfrit  at  Etzel's  court.     As  to  the 
origin  of  the  Quedlinburg  version,  see  Z.f.d.A.  XLI,  24. 

2  Hist.  Franc,  in,  7,  8. 


Stories  knowm  to  Widsith:  Tales  of  the  Lombards  115 

English  society  as  thyle  :  the  professional  orator  and  counsellor1. 
It  is  therefore  remarkable,  as  Miillenhoff  noted  long  ago2,  that 
in  our  list  Thyle  of  the  Rondings  is  coupled  with  Theodric  of 
the  Franks.  Thyle  as  a  proper  name  is  in  any  case  strange 
enough :  can  we  interpret  it  as  referring  to  the  faithful  coun 
sellor  of  the  Thuringian  war  ? 

It  is  difficult  to  track  this  story  in  England.  Here  personal 
names  help  us  but  little.  The  name  Theodric  is  inconclusive, 
for  Englishmen  bearing  it  were  probably  named  after  the 
Gothic  rather  than  the  Frankish  king3 :  the  faithful  servant  is 
anonymous  :  no  argument  can  be  drawn  from  the  rarity  of  the 
name  Iring  in  England,  for  a  man  would  hardly  name  his  son 
from  the  villain  of  the  story:  the  scene  of  the  tale  is  in 
Thuringia,  so  we  should  not  expect  to  find  it  localised  in 
English  place  names.  It  seems  clear  that,  in  the  name  Iringaes 
uueg,  applied  to  the  Milky  way4,  we  have  not  necessarily  a 
reminiscence  of  the  traitor  but  rather  of  an  ancient  mytho 
logical  figure  whose  relation  to  his  namesake  in  the  Thuringian 
story,  and  in  the  Nibelungen  Lied,  is  a  difficult  problem5,  lying 
outside  the  scope  of  this  study. 

The  Lombards. 

Tacitus  describes  the  Longobardi  as  a  small  but  excessively 
warlike  nation6,  successfully  maintaining  their  independence 
against  overwhelming  odds.  This  character  they  retain  through 
out  the  ages,  so  that  the  sentence  of  Tacitus  would  form  an 

1  For  the  functions  of  the  thyle,  cf.  Miillenhoff,  D.A.  v,  288-9,  and  Kaufmann 
in  Sievers'  Philologische  Studien,  Halle,  1896,  pp.  159-162.     Kaufmann  would 
make  Widsith  a  thyle,  by  reason  of  his  relation  to  queen  Ealhhild,  and  his  extra 
ordinary  knowledge  of  princes  and  peoples.     For  an  Irish  parallel  to  the  thyle 
see  Deutschbein  in  the  Germ.  Rom.  Monatsschrift,  i,  114. 

2  Z.f.d.A.  xi,  280-1. 

3  If  indeed  we  are  justified  in  assuming  that  they  were  named  after  either. 
For,  as  saints'  names  are  often  given  to  children  at  the  present  day,  without 
any  thought  of  the  patron  saint,  so  a  child  may  have  been  named  Theodric 
without  thought  of  any  hero  :  perhaps  because  he  had  two  uncles,  Theodred 
and  Godric,  and  his  father  wished  to  compliment  both  at  once. 

4  Epinal  Gloss.,  ed.  Sweet,  E.E.T.S.  (1883),  p.  28. 

8  See  Grimm,  Mythology,  tr.  Stallybrass,  r,  234-5  ;  358-362  ;  Symons  in 
Pauls  Grdr.  d)  n,  1,  32  ;  Koegel,  Ltg.  i,  1,  124-129  ;  Grimm,  Heldewage,  401  ; 
Koegel  in  P.B.B.  xvi,  504. 

6  Germania,  XL. 

8—2 


116  Widsith 

appropriate  motto  for  the  narrative  of  their  national  historian, 
Paul  the  Deacon.  It  is  this  picture  of  a  valiant  little  nation,  in 
the  midst  of  overbearing  neighbours,  which  gives  its  lasting 
interest  to  their  story,  from  the  traditional  days  of  the  fight  of 
Agio  and  Ibor,  and  their  scanty  array1,  against  the  Vandals,  to 
those  of  their  historic  victories  over  the  Herul  and  the  Gepid2. 

Traces  of  the  early  Lombard  home  on  the  lower  Elbe 
probably  remain  in  the  mediaeval  Bardengau  and  Bardowyk3. 
It  is  here  too,  between  the  Angles  on  the  North,  and  the  main 
Suevic  confederation  on  the  South,  that  all  the  early  authori 
ties,  Strabo4,  Tacitus8  and  Ptolemy6,  seem  to  agree  in  placing 
them. 

But  they  must  have  left  this  home  at  some  period  prior  to 
A.D.  165,  when  we  find  them  on  the  Roman  border.  Their 
departure  would  leave  the  Anglian  and  Suevic  folk  immediate 
neighbours,  and  there  was  probably  some  trouble  before  boun 
daries  could  be  readjusted.  Finally,  as  we  know  from  Widsith, 
the  matter  was  settled  by  the  victorious  sword  of  Offa : 

heoldon  forS  si]>>an 
Engle  and  Swaefe,  swa  hit  Ofia  geslog. 

Like  their  neighbours,  the  Angles  and  Saxons,  the  Lombards 
were  less  civilized  than  those  East  Germanic  peoples  with  whom 
the  Romans  were  more  familiar.  At  the  beginning  of  their 
career,  a  Roman  historian,  who  had  seen  them  at  close  quarters, 
characterizes  them  as  '  savage  beyond  the  measure  of  even 
German  ferocity  V  whilst  six  centuries  later  Gregory  the  Great, 
whatever  fallacies  he  might  cherish  as  to  the  angelic  nature  of 
their  far-off  Anglian  kinsmen,  could  only  describe  his  Lombard 
neighbours  as  '  unspeakable8.' 

The  persistency  of  these  national  characteristics  is  the  more 

1  Paulas,  i,  7.  2  Procopius  (Bell.  Gott.  ii,  14 ;  iii,  34). 

3  Of.  Hodgkin's  Italy,  v,  100  ;  Von  Stoltzenberg-Luttmersen,  Die  Spuren 
der  Longobarden,  Hannover,  1889. 

4  vii,  290  :  ^yiffrov  pev  ofo>  rb  TWV  SoiJjSwp  Hdvos-  Siijm  y&p  dird  rov  'Pr/vov 
M^xpi  rov  "AAjSios  •  /u.fyoj  8£  ri  aiiruv  Ka.1  vipav  rou  *AX/3ioj  i^terat  Ka.66.irep  ''Ep/j.6v- 
Sopoi  KO.I  AayK6fiap$oi.     Strabonis  Geographica,  rec.  Meineke,  Lipsise  (Teubner), 
1852,  p.  399. 

6  Germania,  xxxix,  XL.  8  n,  11,  8. 

7  Vellejtts,  n,  106  (ed.  Ellis). 

8  See  Gregorii  i,  Papse,  Registrum  epistolamm,  ed.  P.  Ewald  and  L.  M.  Hart- 
mann,  in  M.G.H.     (Ep.  vn,  23;  v,  38;  App.  n.) 


Stories  known  to  Widsith:  Tales  of  the  Lombards   117 

noteworthy  as  the  Lombards,  though  frequently  mentioned  in 
the  first  century  of  our  era,  disappear  altogether  in  the  middle 
of  the  second,  and  do  not  emerge  again  till  the  sixth,  when 
they  achieve  a  number  of  victories  culminating  in  the  conquest 
of  Italy.  As  our  poem  reflects  the  historic  events  of  the  fourth 
and  fifth  centuries,  precisely  the  period  when  the  Lombard 
nation  was  out  of  the  sight  of  Roman  chroniclers,  its  references 
to  Lombard  kings  need  peculiar  care,  and  are  of  peculiar 
importance. 

Sceafa. 
Sceafa  [weold]  Longbeardum. 

No  name  of  any  such  Lombard  king  Sceaf  is  known  to  the 
historians1 ;  but  it  is  with  this  same  king  Sceaf2  that  the 
pedigree  of  the  West-Saxon  kings  began,  until  a  monkish 
annalist,  by  the  discovery  that  Sceaf  was  a  son  born  to  Noe  in 
the  ark,  enabled  us  to  trace  back  to  Adam  the  genealogy 
of  king  George  V. 

This  reference  to  king  Sheaf  ruling  the  Lombards  means, 
then,  that  our  poet  knew  of  Lombard  lays  dealing  with  Sheaf8, 
or,  if  this  is  saying  too  much,  at  least  that  some  allusion 
founded  upon  such  traditions  had  reached  him4. 

Sceaf  is  then,  apparently,  the  mythical  civilizer  whom  more 
than  one  of  the  tribes  dwelling  near  the  north  sea  coast  re 
garded  as  their  founder,  and  the  parent  of  their  royal  race  :  the 
divine  foundling  who  introduces,  amid  a  hitherto  barbarous 
people,  the  tillage  of  the  earth5,  and  with  it  the  settled  rule  of 
a  king.  The  fine  story  of  Sceaf  is,  by  a  fortunate  chance, 
preserved  to  us,  by  two  Anglo-Latin  historians,  respectively  of 
the  tenth  and  twelfth  centuries,  Ethelwerd  and  William  of 
Malmesbury.  Taking  their  account  in  connection  with  the 
Prologue  of  Beowulf,  we  find  the  story  to  have  been  this. 

1  Cf.  Hodgkin's  Italy,  v,  176. 

2  Sceaf  stands  to  Sceafa  as  Scyld  to  Sceldwa  or  Hreftel  to  Hreftla.     See  note 
to  1.  32. 

3  Koegel,  Ltg.  i,  1,  104. 

4  Cf.  Miillenhoff,  Beovulf,  10 ;  Grimm,  Mythologie,  1835,  219. 

5  '  So  lasst  sich  nicht  verkennen  dass  hier  ein  mythus  von  dem  anfang  und 
der    eiufuhrung  der    altdeutschen    cultur   vorliegt' — Miillenhoff    in   Z.f.d.A. 
vn,  413. 


118  Widsith 

He  was  driven,  as  a  small  boy,  in  a  swift  boat  without  any 
oarsman  to  the  Island  of  Scandza1,  and  found,  by  the  folk  of  that 
land,  sleeping,  with  his  head  upon  a  sheaf  of  corn,  surrounded 
by  weapons.  These  folk,  marvelling,  fed  and  reared  the  un 
known  child,  till,  in  his  manhood,  he  came  to  rule  over  the 
ancient  land  of  the  Angles  in  Sleswig.  When  he  died,  full 
of  years,  his  people  placed  him,  as  he  had  commanded  them,  in 
a  boat  filled  with  weapons  and  treasures,  and  let  the  sea  bear 
him  away,  alone,  as  it  had  borne  him  to  them2. 

The  mention  of  the  sheaf  of  corn,  and  the  connection  of 
Sceaf  with  the  old  Anglian  home  in  Sleswig,  we  owe  to  William 
of  Malmesbury  alone.  The  account  of  the  funeral  rites  is  found 
only  in  the  Prologue  to  Beowulf*. 

But  here,  at  once,  we  are  faced  with  a  difficulty.  In 
Beowulf  the  hero  is  called  not  Sceaf,  but  Scyld  Scefing  "  Shield 
with  the  Sheaf,"  and  is  identified  with  "  Shield,"  the  ancestor- 
king  of  the  Danes. 

It  has  been  argued  that  in  this  Beowulf  is  true  to  the 
original  form  of  the  story:  that  "Shield  with  the  Sheaf"  was 
misunderstood  as  "  Shield  son  of  Sheaf  "  ;  that  a  new  ancestor- 
king,  Sheaf,  was  thus  placed  at  the  head  of  the  genealogy ;  and 
that  the  story  (which  must  of  necessity  be  told  of  the  earliest 
ancestor)  was  then  transferred  from  Shield  to  his  supposed 
father  Sheaf. 

1  Not  Angeln  or  Sleswig,   as  sometimes  stated  on  the  high  authority  of 
Kemble  (Beowulf,  ii,  Appendix  to  Preface,  iii)  and  Grimm  (Mythologie,  1835, 
218).     The  point  is  of  some  importance. 

2  Sceldius  [fuit  filius]  Sceaf.     Iste,  ut  ferunt,  in  quandam  insulam  Ger 
manise    Scandzam,   de    qua   Jordanes,   historiographus    Gothorum,   loquitur, 
appulsus   navi   sine  remige,  puerulus,   posito   ad  caput  frumenti   manipulo, 
dormiens,  ideoque  Sceaf  nuncupatus,  ab  hominibus  regionis  illius  pro  miraculo 
exceptus  et   sedulo   nutritus :    adulta   setate   regnavit  in    oppido    quod   tune 
Slaswic,  nunc  vero  Haithebi  appellatur.     Est  autem  regio  ilia  Anglia  vetus 
dicta.... 

William  of  Malmesbury,  De  Gestis  Regum  Anglorum,  Lib.  ir,  §  116,  vol.  i, 
p.  121,  ed.  Stubbs,  1887. 

Ipse  Scef  cum  uno  dromone  advectus  est  in  insula  Oceani,  quse  dicitur 
Scani,  armis  circundatus,  eratque  valde  recens  puer,  &  ab  incolis  illius  terrae 
ignotus  ;  attamen  ab  eis  suscipitur,  &  ut  familiarem  diligenti  animo  eum 
custodierunt,  &  post  in  regem  eligunt. 

Ethelwerdus,  iii,  3  in  Savile's  Rerum  Anglicarum  Scriptores  post  Bedam, 
Francofurti,  1601,  p.  842. 

3  See  discussion  of  Scyld  in  Olrik's  Danmarks  Heltedigtning,  1903,  pp.  223- 
277:  Skjold. 


Stories  known  to  Widsith:  Tales  of  the  Lombards  119 

This  view,  which  was  originally  suggested  by  Leo1,  has  of 
more  recent  years  become  the  accepted  one ;  and  the  theory 
that  Scyld  is  the  true  hero  of  the  story  has  been  endorsed 
by  Mo'ller1,  Sarrazin8,  Binz4,  Sievers5,  Olrik6,  Symons7,  Mogk8, 
Koch9,  Chadwick10,  Lawrence",  Gering13,  Heyne-Schiicking13, 
and  Henry  Bradley14.  On  the  other  hand,  the  older  view,  that 
Sceaf  is  the  original  subject  of  the  rudderless  boat  tale,  and 
that  this  story  is,  in  the  Prologue  to  Beowulf,  erroneously 
applied  to  the  hero  Scyld,  has  been  supported  among  others 
by  Grimm18,  Kemble16,  Ettmiiller17,  Miillenhoff18,  ten  Brink19, 
Koegel20,  Heinzel21,  Henning22;  and  there  is  more  to  be  said 
for  it  than  has  of  late  been  generally  admitted. 

For  Sceaf  as  an  ancient  king  is  vouched  for 

(1)  by  this  passage  in  the  catalogue  of  kings  in  Widsith. 

(2)  by  the  West-Saxon  genealogy  in  the  Chronicle.     It  is 
true  that  the  name  does  not  occur  in  the  oldest  MS  (the  Parker 
MS  of  the  late  9th  century)  and  that  the  three  MSS  in  which  it 
does  occur  are  all  of  the  llth  century.     But  the  name  of  Sceaf 
has  simply  fallen  out  of  the  Parker  MS  by  a  scribe's  blunder, 
together  with  a  group  of  other  names ;    and  the   agreement 
of   the    other  three   MSS,   though   each   individually   is   late, 
carries  us  back  to  the  archetype  of  all  three,  which  is  also  the 
original  of  the  Parker  MS  itself.     We  can  be  certain,  then, 
that  Sceaf  was  recognized  as  standing  at  the  head  of  the  West 

I  Ueber  Beowulf,  Halle,  1839,  p.  24.     Grundtvig   at  an  earlier  date  had 
expressed  the  belief  that  thie  story  originally  belonged  to  Skjold  (Danne-Virke, 
n,  218),  but  Leo  was  the  first  to  explain  how  Sceaf  could  have  supplanted  Scyld. 

8  V.E.  43. 

»  Engl.  Stud,  xvi,  73-80  (Review  of  Mullenhoffs  Beovulf)  ;  cf.  Anglia, 
xix,  383 ;  xxvin,  410-13.  Since  writing  the  above,  I  notice  that  Sarrazin 
quite  recently  gave  the  weight  of  his  authority  to  the  support  of  Sceaf  (Engl. 
Stud.  XLI,  10). 

*  P.B.B.  xx,  147-150.  B  S.B.  Sachs.  Akad.  1895,  176. 

6  Helte-Digtning,  223-277.  7  Pauls  Ordr.(z)  m,  645. 

8  Pauls  Grdr.Q  in,  320. 

9  Ynglingar,  in  Historisk  Tidskrift,  1895,  164.  10  282. 

II  Pub.  of  the  Mod.  Lang.  Association  of  America,  xxiv,  1909,  p.  259. 

12  100.  13  320.  14  Encyclopedia  Britannica,  sub  voce  Beowulf. 

15  Mythology,  trans.  Stallybrass,  1880,  i,  170. 

18  Beowulf,  u,  Postscript  to  Preface  v.  17  Beowulf,  1840,  p.  6. 

18  Z.f.d.A.  vn,  412-14;  Beovulf,  10-12. 

19  Pauls  Grdr.(i)u,  1,  532;  Beowulf,  195. 

20  Ltg.  i,  1,  105  ;  Z.f.d.A.  xxxvn,  274.  D  A.f.d.A.  xvi,  267-8. 

28  Z.f.d.A.  XLI,  156-169.  Golther  (209)  and  Meyer  (193)  also  give  a  tacit 
support  to  Sceaf,  by  telling  the  story  of  him,  not  of  Scyld. 


120  Widsith 

Saxon  pedigree  in  an  official  list  which  was  drawn  up,  certainly 
before  the  end  of  the  ninth  century,  and  probably  in  the 
middle  of  that  century1.  We  have,  of  course,  no  allusion  in 
this  list  to  the  "  mysterious  boat "  story :  but  the  fact  that 
Sceaf  is  an  ancestor  of  Scyld  and  stands  at  the  head  of  the 
pedigree,  proves  that  at  this  date  the  story  must  have  been 
told  of  him,  rather  than  of  Scyld. 

(3)  We  have   the   evidence  of  Ethelwerd   for  the  Sceaf 
story  in  the  tenth  century  and 

(4)  of  William  of  Malmesbury  in  the  twelfth.     Late  as 
William  is,  the  character  of  the  additional  details  which  he 
gives  shows  them  to  be  genuine  folk  lore,  not  a  mere  amplifica 
tion  of  Ethelwerd's  story ;  and  he  is  a  historian  who  avowedly 
drew  very  largely  from  popular  songs2. 

The  only  evidence  on  the  other  side  is  that  already  men 
tioned  of  the  prologue  to  Beowulf,  where  the  story  told  of 
Sceaf  by  Ethelwerd  and  William  is  attributed  to  Scyld. 

That  Scyld  was  an  early  king  of  the  Danes  we  know  from 
Saxo:  another  account  makes  him  primus  inhabitator  Germanie: 
but  nowhere  save  in  Beowulf  is  the  story  of  the  boat  told  of  him. 
It  is  quite  conceivable  that  the  author  of  the  prologue  to 
Beowulf  has  transferred  to  Scyld,  whom  he  knew  as  ancestor  of 
the  Danish  house,  a  story  which  belongs  of  right  to  Sceaf,  the 
ancestor  of  the  West-Saxon  house.  This  would  be  quite  in 
accordance  with  that  blending  of  English  and  Danish  tradition 
which  we  seem  to  be  able  to  trace  elsewhere  in  Beowulf, 

Either  theory  is  possible,  and  if  we  had  only  Ethelwerd  and 
William  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  prologue  to  Beowulf  on  the 
other,  it  would  be  difficult  to  decide.  But  the  mention  of 
Sceaf  at  the  head  of  the  pedigree  in  the  Chronicle  and  still 
more  this  mention  in  Widsith  render  very  difficult  the  position 

1  I  hope  later  to  give  a  critical  text  of  the  West  Saxon  pedigree,  with  a  fuller 
discussion  of  the  Sceaf-Scyld  problem. 

2  Cf.  Gesta  Regum  Anglorum,  n,  §§  138,  148,  188  (ed.  Stubbs,  vol.  i,  pp.  155, 
165,  230).    Macaulay,  in  his  Introduction  to  the  Lays  of  Ancient  Rome,  instances 
William  as  a  typical  example  of  the  historian  who  draws  upon  popular  song : 
Freeman  (Historical  Essays,  First  Series)  has   shown  the   same.      A  further 
piece  of  evidence  tending  to  show  that  William  is  recording  genuine  tradition 
has  been  pointed  out  by  Chad  wick  (278). 


Stories  known  to  Widsith:  Tales  of  the  Lombards  121 

of  those  who  suppose  him  to  be  a  late  creation,  a  figure  formed 
from  a  misunderstanding  of  the  epithet  Scefing  applied  to  the 
hero  Scyld. 

Till  more  evidence  appears,  it  would  seem  that  we  are 
justified  in  following  in  the  steps  of  Kemble  and  Grimm  : 
in  accepting  the  story  of  William  of  Malmesbury  as  a  true 
piece  of  folk  lore,  and  in  accepting  Sheaf  as  the  hero  of 
the  story,  as  the  primitive  king  alike  of  Lombard  and  English 
tradition. 

jfigelmund, 

No  mention  of  either  Shield  or  Sheaf  is  to  be  found  in  the 
Lombard  historian,  Paul  the  Deacon,  though  he,  like  William 
of  Malmesbury,  has  drawn  liberally  enough  upon  the  songs  of 
his  people,  either  directly,  or  through  an  intermediate  Latin 
document,  the  Origo  gentis  Langobardorum  of  the  end  of  the 
seventh  century.  In  one  case  indeed  the  Origo  and,  following 
it,  Paul,  have  given  the  old  story  in  such  detail  that  students 
have  thought  that  they  could  trace  the  alliteration  of  the  old 
Teutonic  verse  under  the  Latin  paraphrase1.  This  story,  telling 
how  the  Long-beards  came  by  their  name,  is  the  one  which  has 
been  put  back  into  stirring  English  verse  by  Kingsley,  as  Wulfs 
song  in  Hypatia. 

After  the  death  of  their  two  dukes  Agio  and  Ibor  (the 
victors  in  this  battle  with  the  Vandals)  the  Lombards,  we 
are  told  by  the  Origo  and  by  Paul,  were  governed  by  kings,  of 
whom  Agelmund,  the  son  of  Agio,  was  the  first.  An  ^Egel- 
mund  is  mentioned  in  our  poem,  together  with  a  hero  who 
bears  the  name  of  another  Lombard  king,  Eadwine  (i.e.  Audoin, 
the  father  of  Alboin). 

...Hlij>e  and  Incgenj>eow 

Eadwine  sohte  ic  and  Elsan,  ^Egelmund  and  Hungar, 
and  >a  wloncan  gedryht  Wij>-Myrginga. 

It  is  usually  assumed  that  we  have  here  a  series  of  Lombard 
kings,  who  have  been  attracted  into  the  circle  of  Ermanaric, 
among  whose  champions  they  are  numbered.  Hlithe  has 

1  Koegel,  Ltg.  i,  1,  107-8.  Bruckner,  Die  Sprache  der  Langobarden  (Q.F.), 
1895,  pp.  19,  20. 


122  Widsith 

generally  been  identified  with  Leth  or  Lethuc,  an  early  Lom 
bard  king1 :  but  we  have  seen  above  that  the  linking  of  Hlithe 
with  Incgentheow  makes  it  almost  certain  that  he  is  rather  a 
hero  of  the  wars  of  Goth  and  Hun2.  The  evidence  which  has 
led  to  Elsa  being  declared  a  Lombard  chief  is  ludicrously 
inadequate3:  Hungar,  if  we  can  identify  him  at  all,  is  a  Goth8. 
The  explanation  of  the  Wty-Myrgingas  as  neighbours  of  the 
Myrgings,  i.e.  Lombards,  depends  upon  the  assumption,  which 
itself  is  groundless,  that  in  our  poem  Myrgings  and  Lombards 
are  regarded  as  allies4. 

We  are  left  then  with  two  names  alone,  Eadwine  and 
jEgelmund,  to  support  the  theory  that  a  group  of  Lombard 
kings  and  heroes  has  deliberately  been  incorporated  into  the 
company  of  the  retainers  of  Eormanric. 

That  the  Lombard  dynasty  was  connected  by  the  Old 
English  poets  with  Gothic  story  is  possible  enough.  A  similar 
connection  is  said  to  be  found  in  Hungarian  legend 5.  We  have 
seen,  too,  how  in  our  poem  Ealhhild,  the  wife  of  Eormanric,  is 
spoken  of  as  daughter  of  Eadwine6,  who  is  apparently  the 
Lombard  king.  But  this  hardly  supports  the  theory  that  the 
Eadwine  mentioned  among  the  household  of  Eormanric  is 
identical  with  the  Lombard.  For  if  Widsith  escorts  Ealhhild, 
daughter  of  the  Lombard  king  Eadwine,  to  the  court  of  Eor 
manric  the  Goth,  then  the  Eadwine  whom  he  meets  there  as 
one  among  the  Gothic  king's  retainers  can  hardly  be  the 
Lombard. 

It  is  quite  possible  then,  but  it  seems  to  me  unlikely,  that 
the  poet  meant  to  include  Lombard  champions  among  the  host 
of  Eormanric,  waging  battle  with  the  people  of  Attila. 

I  should  be  much  rather  inclined  to  surmise  that  the  two 
lines  containing  the  names  Eadwine,  Elsa,  jEgelmund,  Hungar 
and  Wfy-Myrgingas  are  a  random  interpolation,  the  work  of 
the  same  unintelligent  person  who  inserted  the  Biblical  and 
Oriental  names  among  the  list  of  peoples7.  Eadwine  is  mere 
repetition,  like  the  repetition  of  Creacas,  Finnas  and  Casere ; 

1  See  note  to  1.  116.  2  See  above,  p.  47.  3  See  note  to  1.  117. 

4  See  note  to  1.  118.  B  See  Matthaei  in  Z.f.d.A.  XLVI,  3  etc. 

8  See  above,  pp.  23-24.          *  See  above,  pp.  7-8. 


Stories  Tmown  to  Widsith :  Tales  of  the  Lombards  123 

Elsa  may  very  possibly,  like  Hwala1,  come  from  the  widely 
known  genealogy  of  the  West-Saxon  kings;  Wty-Myrgingas 
looks  like  a  mechanical  repetition  of  wty  Myrgingum  in  1.  42, 
which  the  interpolator  perhaps  took  to  be  one  name.  He  had 
a  particular  weakness  for  scattering  the  Myrging  name  over 
the  page,  cf.  11.  84-5  :  mid  Myrgingum... ongend  Myrgingum. 

But  what  most  of  all  points  to  these  five  names  being  an 
interpolation,  is  that  they  interrupt  the  series  of  heroes  of  the 
wars  of  Goth  and  Hun.  When  we  eliminate  the  interpolation, 
the  list  runs,  as  it  should :  Hlithe,  Incgentheow,  Wulfhere, 
Wyrmhere,  and  then  the  reference  to  the  fight  in  the  Vistula 
Wood. 

If  these  lines  are  an  interpolation,  it  is  not  clear  how  the 
interpolator  got  the  name  of  ^Egelmund.  In  this  form  the 
name  is  hardly  known  in  England.  It  may  be  a  last  echo  of 
the  story  of  the  Lombard  hero :  if  it  be  we  cannot  judge  how 
much  of  his  legend  was  still  remembered. 

Paul2  tells  us  how  Agelmund  saved  from  the  water  a  child, 
whose  father  was  unknown,  and  caused  him  to  be  carefully 
brought  up  :  and  how  this  child,  named  Lamissio3  by  the  king, 
grew  in  time  to  be  a  great  champion. 

This  story  is  generally  supposed  to  be  a  reflection  of  the 
Sceaf  myth4,  but  the  likeness  is  not  sufficiently  strong  to 
enable  us  to  speak  with  certainty. 

/Elfwine  and  Eadwine. 

Swylce  ic  ws&s  on  Eatule  mid  j?Elfwine... 
...beam  Eadwines. 

The  identification  of  Hlithe  and  Elsa  with  Lombard  kings 
and  chiefs  is  then  improbable :  but  as  to  Eadwine  and  his 
son  ^Elfwine  there  is  no  doubt  that  they  are  the  Audoin  and 
Alboin  under  whom  the  Lombard  people  emerge  again  into 

i  See  note  to  1.  14.  2  i,  15. 

3  Laiamicho  in  the  Origo :  which  however  knows  nothing  about  the  marvel 
lous  origin  of  the  hero,  but  makes  him  ex  genere  Gugingus,  like  his  (foster-) 
father. 

4  See  Leo,  Beovulf,  p.  31 ;  Leo  connected  the  stories  of  Sceaf,  Lamissio,  and 
the  Knight  of  the  Swan ;  cf.  also  Miillenhoff,  Beovulf,  10  and  (to  the  contrary) 
Koegel, ~Ltg.  i,  1,  106. 


124  Widsith 

the  light  of  history1.  Not  but  what  the  stories  of  these  two 
chiefs,  as  given  by  Paul,  show  clear  traces  of  the  Germanic 
poet  at  work  :  for  Paul,  writing  after  the  Lombard  overthrow, 
is  separated  by  more  than  two  centuries  from  Alboin's  invasion 
of  Italy :  probably  the  poet  of  Widsith  stands  nearer  to  that 
event  than  does  the  historian  of  the  Lombards.  Thus  the 
greatest  of  all  Germanic  tales  is  woven  in  Paul's  history  round 
the  figures  of  Audoin  and  his  son  Alboin.  The  story,  which 
reminds  us  of  the  twenty-fourth  Iliad  by  its  bringing  into 
conflict  the  two  strongest  motives  of  the  primitive  warrior,  the 
duty  of  hospitality,  and  the  duty  of  revenge,  tells  how  Alboin 
won  a  battle  over  the  Gepidae  and  slew  in  single  combat 
Thurismod,  the  son  of  their  king  Thurisind.  Yet  Audoin, 
according  to  the  Lombard  custom,  would  not  give  his  son  the 
rank  of  companion  at  his  table,  because  he  had  not  received 
weapons  from  the  king  of  some  other  people2. 

When  Alboin  heard  this  reply  of  his  father,  he  took  with  him  forty 
youths  only,  and  betook  himself  to  his  old  foe  Thurisind,  king  of  the 
Gepidae,  and  told  him  why  he  had  come.  Thurisind  received  him  gently, 
invited  him  to  the  feast  and  placed  him  at  his  right  hand,  where  Thurismod, 
his  dead  son,  had  been  wont  to  sit.  And,  whilst  they  feasted,  Thurisind, 
beholding  his  son's  seat,  and  calling  to  mind  his  death,  and  seeing  his 
slayer  seated  in  his  room,  sighed  deeply ;  nor  could  he  forbear  but 
that  his  grief  burst  forth,  and  he  said  "  Lovely  to  me  is  that  seat,  but  he 
who  sits  in  it  is  hard  enough  to  look  upon."  Then  the  king's  second  son, 
moved  by  his  father's  speech,  began  to  revile  the  Lombards,  comparing 
them,  becaxise  they  wore  white  cross-garters,  to  white-shinned  mares3. 
Then  a  Lombard  replied,  "  Go  to  Asfeld :  and  there  canst  thou  well  find 
how  hard  those  whom  thou  namest  mares  can  kick  :  where  the  bones  of 
thy  brother  lie  scattered  like  those  of  a  hack  in  the  midst  of  the  fields." 
The  Gepidae  were  unable  to  bear  this,  and,  moved  to  mighty  wrath, 
pressed  to  avenge  these  open  insults  :  the  Lombards,  on  their  side,  ready 
to  fight,  placed  their  hands  upon  their  hilts.  Then  the  king,  leaping  from 
the  table,  threw  himself  between  them  and  restrained  his  men :  threaten 
ing  to  punish  first  him  who  first  began  the  fight.  It  was  no  victory 
pleasing  to  God,  he  said,  when  a  man  in  his  own  house  destroyed  his 
guest.  So  at  last  the  quarrel  was  stayed,  and  they  finished  the  banquet 
with  revelry.  Thurisind,  taking  the  arms  of  his  son  Thurismod,  gave 
them  to  Alboin,  and  sent  him  back  in  peace,  safe  to  his  father's  land*. 

1  The  names  correspond  exactly,  and  the  mention  of  Italy  makes  the 
identification  certain. 

2  Similarly  Beowulf,  even  after  he  has  slain  Grendel,  still  sits  with  the 
giogffS,  and  with  Hrothgar's  two  young  sons. — Beowulf,  1189-91. 

3  The  point  of  Fetilce  sunt  equee  quas  similatis  is  not  clear.     Waitz  supposes 
Fetil(S=faetulce.      Sievers   (P.B.B.    xvi,   363-5)   and  Koegel   (Ltg.   i,    1,   118) 
connect  it  with  O.H.G.fizzil,  dappled.     But  is  this  sufficiently  offensive  ? 

*  i,  24. 


Stories  known  to  Widsith :  Tales  of  the  Lombards  125 

What  element  of  truth  this  story  of  Alboin  may  contain,  we 
can  never  know :  the  events  in  the  background  are  historical 
and  certain  enough.  The  great  battle  between  Lombards  and 
Gepidae  probably  took  place  in  554.  In  565  Audoin  died,  and 
Alboin  became  king:  he  annihilated  his  ancient  guests  in  a 
second  great  battle  in  567 :  and  on  Easter  Monday,  568,  he  set 
out  from  the  highlands  of  Noricum,  which  had  long  been  the 
Lombard  home,  to  conquer  Italy. 

But  the  Lombards  had  always  been  a  scanty  people,  and 
had  lost  heavily  in  the  terrible  battle  in  which  Alboin  had 
struck  down  Thurismod1.  Not  merely  'Widsith/  but  all  the 
masterless  men  in  Germany,  would  seem  to  have  joined  Alboin's 
ranks.  Two  hundred  years  later,  the  descendants  of  Gepidae 
and  Bulgarians,  Sarmatians  and  Suevi  could  still  be  distin 
guished  in  Italy2.  Some  thirty  thousand  Saxons,  with  their 
wives  and  children,  joined  the  invaders. 

Wasted  as  Italy  had  been  by  pestilence  and  famine,  it 
could  make  no  adequate  resistance  to  this  motley  host,  and, 
with  the  exception  of  the  great  coast  towns,  Ravenna,  Rome, 
and  Naples,  the  whole  country  was  soon  in  the  hands  of  the 
conquerors :  not,  however,  before  Alboin  had  been  murdered : 
according  to  the  Lombard  story  by  his  wife,  a  Gepid  princess, 
in  vengeance  for  the  wrongs  which  he  had  inflicted  upon  her 
race. 

Perhaps  Alboin,  like  Attila,  possessed  exceptional  powers  of 
holding  together  jarring  nationalities :  certainly  his  death,  like 
that  of  the  Hun,  was  followed  by  dissensions  among  his  host. 
The  Saxons  were  given  the  choice  of  adopting  Lombard  laws 
and  customs,  or  leaving  the  country :  and  they  chose  to  go8. 
Most  of  them  were  slaughtered  in  their  attempt  to  regain  their 
old  homes.  But  many  of  Alboin's  host,  disappointed,  in  the 
anarchy  which  followed  his  death,  of  their  share  in  the  plunder, 

1  Jordanes  refers  to  the  battle  as  one  of  the  three  bloodiest  of  recent  times, 
cecideruntque  ex  utraque  parte  amplius  LX  milia.     Jordanes,  Romana,  ed. 
Mommsen,  p.  52. 

2  Certum  est  autem,  tune  Alboin  multos  secum  ex  diversis,  quas  vel  alii  reges 
vel  ipse  ceperat,  gentibus  ad  Italiam  adduxisse.     Unde  usque  hodie  eorum  in 
quibus  habitant  vicos  Gepidos,  Vulgares,  Sarmatas,  Pannonios,  Suavos,  Noricos 
tive  aliis  huiuscemodi  nominibus  appellamus.    Paulus,  Hist.  Lang,  n,  26. 

3  Gregory  of  Tours,  Hist.  Franc,  rv,  42 ;  v,  15.      Paulus,  Hist.  Lang,  n,  6  ; 
in,  5-7.     Hodgkin's  Italy,  v,  189. 


126  Widsiih 

may  have  returned  to  their  northern  tribesmen  with  tales  of 
the  treasures  of  Welsh  land,  and  of  the  great  deeds  of  its 
conqueror. 

So  a  very  few  years  after  Alboin's  death  his  name  may 
have  been  a  household  word  in  North  Germany :  while  at  the 
same  time  the  distance  of  the  scene  of  his  exploits  would  make 
him  seem,  to  the  wild  North  Sea  tribesmen,  a  half-mythical 
hero  ;  since  for  popular  poetry  '  a  distance  of  a  thousand  miles 
is  as  good  as  one  of  a  thousand  years1.'  Before  the  end  of  the 
sixth  century  the  names  of  ^Elfwine,  Eormanric  and  ^Etla  may 
well  have  been  thrown  together  as  they  are  in  our  poem :  nor 
are  we  necessarily  compelled  to  regard  the  reference  to  Alboin 
as  an  interpolation  differing  very  widely  in  date  from  the 
matter  of  which  the  bulk  of  our  poem  is  made  up. 

That,  two  centuries  later,  Alboin  was  remembered  among 
High  and  Low  Germans  alike  we  know  on  the  authority  of  Paul 
the  Deacon.  "  His  generosity  and  his  glory,  his  valour  and  his 
success  in  war,  are  celebrated  in  the  songs  of  Bavarians  and 
Saxons,  and  other  people  of  kindred  speech2." 

It  is  a  pleasing  accident  that  our  catalogue  of  heroes,  as 
it  includes  Eastgota,  the  first,  should  also  include  ^Elfwine, 
the  last,  the  wildest  and  the  most  romantic  of  the  German 
conquerors  of  Rome. 

1  On  pent  dire  que  le  respect  que  Von  a  pour  Us  heros  augmente  a  mesure 
qu'ils  s'&loignent  de  nous.     L'eloignement  des  pays  repare,  en  quelque  sorte, 
la  trop  grande  proximite  des  temps,  car  le  peuple  ne  met  guere  de  difference  entre 
ce  qui  est,  sifose  ainsi  parler,  a  mille  ans  de  lui,  et  ce  qui  en  est  a  mille  lieues. 
Racine,  Preface  to  Bajazet. 

2  Alboin  vero  ita  prceclarum  longe  lateque  no/men  percrebuit,  ut  hactenus  etiam 
tarn  aput  Baioariorum  gentem  quamque  et  Saxonum,  sed  et  alios  eiusdem  lingua 
homines,  eius  liberalitas  et  gloria,  bellorumque  felicitas  et  virtus  in  eorum  car- 
minibus  celebretur.     Paulus,  Hist.  Lang,  i,  27. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

WIDSITH  AND  THE  CRITICS. 

THE  views  which  scholars  have  held  about  Widsith  have 
mainly  been  based  upon  a  literary  study  of  its  style  and  heroic 
legend.  Before  going  on  to  examine  the  geography,  grammar 
and  metre  of  the  poem,  we  may  see  what  measure  of  agreement 
has  been  arrived  at  upon  grounds  of  style  and  legend.  We  can 
then  decide  whether  or  not  these  conclusions  are  confirmed  by 
a  study  of  metrical  and  grammatical  details. 

Natural  divisions  of  the  poem. 

There  is,  at  any  rate,  a  prima  facie  case  for  the  theory 
that  Widsith  is  compounded  from  several  sources.  If,  as  is 
likely  enough,  several  metrical  catalogues  existed  in  early  times, 
enumerating  kings  and  tribes,  they  would  be  likely  to  coalesce. 
And  it  cannot  be  denied  that  the  poem,  as  we  have  it,  falls  into 
certain  well-defined  sections  : 

(a)  First,  we  have  an  introduction  of  nine  lines,  charac 
terizing  Widsith,  and  introducing  the  poem  proper  :  "  Widsith 
the  far-travelled  Myrging,  who,  with  Ealhhild,  sought  the  home 
of  Ermanaric,  spake  and  said  " — 

(A)  Then  follows  a  catalogue  of  kings  and  tribes,  two 
kings  and  two  tribes  being  generally  mentioned  in  each  line  : 

^Etla  weold  Hunum,  Eormanric  Gotum. 

The  Traveller's  personality  is  here  kept  quite  in  the  back 
ground.  The  list,  it  is  true,  begins  "I  have  heard  of  many 
kings  ruling  over  the  nations " :  but  ic  gefrcegn  is  an  epic 
formula  with  little  meaning.  Widsith  is  not  said  to  have 


128  Widsith 

himself  visited  either  the  kings  or  their  folk.  After  seventeen 
lines  in  which  the  names  of  kings  and  princes  are  crowded 
together,  we  get,  in  more  detail,  allusions  to  the  stories  of  Offa 
of  Angel,  of  Hrothwulf,  Hrothgar  and  Ingeld. 

(B)  Then  the  Traveller  gives  the  list  of  the  tribes  which 
he  himself  has  visited.  For  the  most  part  these  are  grouped 
three  in  a  line: 

Mid  Wenlum  ic  wses,  and  mid  Waernum,  and  mid  Wicingum. 

It  is  among  these  names  that  the  evidently  late  passage  of 
Biblical  and  Oriental  lore  occurs.  The  chiefs  alluded  to  in 
section  (B)  are  few,  and  they  are  mentioned,  in  some  detail, 
with  words  of  praise.  Particular  honour  is  done  to  the  lady 
Ealhhild.  Her  praise  the  poet  has  sung  through  many  a  land. 

((7)  "  Thence  I  fared  through  the  land  of  the  Goths,  and 
visited  the  champions  of  Ermanaric."  A  catalogue  of  these 
Gothic  champions  follows  :  two,  Wudga  and  Hama,  are  selected 
for  special  honour. 

(6)  Finally  come  nine  lines  of  epilogue.  "  In  such  wise  do 
gleemen  wander  from  land  to  land."  This  passage,  like  the 
introductory  lines,  is  not  supposed  to  be  spoken  by  Widsith, 
but  is  the  moralization  of  the  poet. 

Without  prejudice  to  the  question  of  unity  of  authorship, 
we  will  call  A,  B,  C,  respectively  the  "  Catalogue  of  kings,"  the 
"  Lay  of  Ealhhild  " — for  it  is  to  her  praise  that  this  portion  of 
the  poem  leads  up — and  "  The  Champions  of  Ermanaric." 

Early  Criticism :  Mullenhoff,  Holier,  Ten  Brink. 

Yet,  in  spite  of  the  ease  with  which  it  may  be  divided  up, 
our  poem,  with  the  exception  of  the  one  passage  in  which 
the  names  of  the  Biblical  folk  occur,  bears  upon  it  the  impress, 
if  not  of  one  mind,  at  any  rate  of  one  race  and  of  one  period. 

We  have  seen  that  this  suspicious  passage  was  rejected 
quite  early :  by  Kemble  in  1833,  and,  with  the  addition  of 
another  two  lines,  by  Leo  in  1838.  Six  years  later  (1844) 
came  MiillenhofFs  study  of  the  poem  in  the  Nordalbingische 
Studien.  Mullenhoff  tried  to  distinguish  a  number  of  early 


Widsith  and  the  Critics  129 

interpolations,  such,  for  instance,  as  the  passages  dealing  with 
Offa,  Hrothgar  and  Hrothwulf1.  He  did  not,  however,  make 
any  detailed  dissection  of  the  poem  into  its  presumed  com 
ponent  parts. 

In  his  subsequent  study,  fifteen  years  later,  in  the  Zeit- 
schrift  fur  deutsches  Alterthum,  he  abandoned  any  such  dis 
section  as  hopeless.  He  rejected  the  lines  already  rejected  by 
Kemble  and  Leo,  together  with  some  others,  twenty-one  in  all2, 
which  he  regarded  as  the  work  of  one  and  the  same  inter 
polator.  "  I  cannot  distinguish,"  he  wrote,  "  earlier  and  later 
additions  in  this  poem.  It  appears  to  me  to  have  undergone 
interpolation  from  one  hand  only.  But  let  no  one  think  that, 
by  rejecting  these  additions,  he  can  restore  exactly  the  original 
poem.  In  its  essence  it  is  certainly  the  oldest  which  Anglo- 
Saxon  literature  possesses.  But  when  was  it  first  written 
down?  And  has  no  word  been  distorted,  deranged,  or  lost3?" 

Mullenhoff,  then,  allowed  fully  for  the  different  corruptions 
which  might  have  crept  in  between  the  seventh  century  and 
the  eleventh.  He  also  recognized,  what  could  scarcely  have 
escaped  the  observation  of  a  much  less  able  critic,  that  the 
poem  fell  into  three  main  divisions :  the  catalogue  of  kings ; 
the  catalogue  of  tribes  and  chiefs  whom  Widsith  had  known ; 
and  the  Ermanaric  catalogue4.  But  Miillenhoff  at  this  date 
seems  to  have  regarded  all  these  as  merely  sections  of  one 
poem,  the  work  of  one  mind8. 

Close  on  a  quarter  of  a  century  later,  in  his  Beovulf,  he 

1  Nordalb.  St.  i,  162.     Compare  also  "  Wenu  nun  aber  Burgunden  genannt 
werden  und  ihr  Konig  jetzt  Giinther  Gudhhere  genannt  wird,  so  konnte  das 
wieder  nicht  derselbe  Sanger  than  der  friiher  ihnen  Gifica  gab  "  (p.  165). 

2  14-17,  75-87,  131-134.  3  Z.f.d.A.  xi,  294. 

4  Miillenhoff  in  1859  divided  thus  : 
1-9.     Introduction. 

10-49.     First  section,  with  10-13  introduction  [rejecting  14-17]. 

50-108.  Second  section,  with  50-56  introduction  [rejecting  75-87,  thus 
bringing  the  passage  in  praise  of  .(Elfwine  nearer  to  that  in  praise  of  his  sister 
Ealhhild]. 

109-130.     Third  section. 

131-143.     Conclusion  [rejecting  131-134]. 

He  adhered  to  this  division  in  his  later  work,  but  added  45-49  to  the  list 
of  supposed  interpolations. 

5  Cf.  Z.f.d.A.  xi,  285,  where  unity  of  authorship  is  assumed.     Some  years 
earlier  (1848)  Mullenhoff  seems  to  have  held  the  theory,  later  advanced  by 
Moller,  that  the  Ermanaric-catalogue  differed  in  date  from  the  rest  of  the  poem. 
In  the  Zj.d.A.  vi,  458  he  attributes  it  to  the  eighth  century. 

c.  9 


130  Widsith 

expressed  his  agreement  with  the  theory  which  recognized 
in  these  three  sections  three  originally  unconnected  poems. 
But  with  regard  to  details  he  was  still  cautious.  "  The  work 
of  each  of  these  poets  can  be  separated  from  that  of  the  two 
others,  but  not  from  that  of  the  man  who  bound  the  three  lays 
into  one."  All  three  poems,  he  thought,  bore  the  stamp  of  the 
same  age,  or  at  least  fell  within  a  century  of  each  other  :  the 
period  was  the  later  sixth  and  the  earlier  seventh  century : 
the  first  section,  the  catalogue  of  kings,  was  the  oldest1. 

In  regarding  the  three  lays  as  the  work  of  distinct  authors, 
Mlillenhoff  was  following  in  the  steps  of  Hermann  Moller,  who, 
in  his  Altenglische  Volksepos  (1883),  had  attempted  to  define  the 
work  of  the  different  poets  with  that  exactitude  which  Miillen- 
hoff  regarded  as  beyond  the  power  of  the  critic. 

Broadly  speaking,  Moller  divided  the  poem  as  Mullenhoff 
had  done  in  1859  ;  he  distinguished  a  prologue  (11.  1-9) 
followed  by  (I.)  the  catalogue  of  kings  (10-49),  in  which  he 
supposed  the  more  detailed  passage  in  praise  of  Offa  and 
Hrothgar  to  be  a  later  addition ;  (II.)  the  Ealhhild  lay  (50-81, 
90-108) ;  (III.)  the  catalogue  of  Ermanaric's  champions  (88-90, 
110-134);  and  finally  the  epilogue  (135-143).  A  number  of 
minor  alterations  were  made  in  the  poem  by  Moller,  in  order 
to  force  it  into  those  four  line  stanzas  in  which  he  believed  the 
Old  English  lays  to  have  been  originally  composed.  But  the 
gist  of  Moller's  criticism  lay  in  the  fact  that,  whilst  accepting 
Mtillenhoff's  division  of  the  poem  into  three,  he  confidently 
attributed  each  of  these  three  sections  to  a  different  author 
and  a  different  period. 

One  further  essential  alteration  he  made.  Four  persons 
are  specially  praised  in  the  Ealhhild  lay  for  their  gene 
rosity  :  Guthhere  the  Burgundian,  JElfwine  son  of  Eadwine 
the  Lombard,  Eormanric  the  Goth,  whose  splendid  gift  to 
the  poet  is  specially  mentioned.  This  gift,  as  we  know, 
Widsith,  on  his  return  home,  presented  to  Eadgils,  his  lord, 
from  whom  he  held  his  fief.  Then,  in  conclusion,  we  have  the 
praise  of  the  generosity  of  Ealhhild,  daughter  of  Eadwine. 

1  Beovulf,  1883  (published  posthumously,  1889),  p.  92. 


Widsith  and  the  Critics  131 

But  Moller  would  not  allow  a  place  to  Eormanric  in  the 
Ealhhild  lay.  That  Eormanric  should  have  bestowed  a  ring 
upon  our  poet  was,  he  argued,  chronologically  impossible, 
whilst  a  gift  from  ^Elfvvine  need  not  have  been  fictitious. 
Secondly,  ^Elfwine  is  praised  in  the  poem  as  the  most  generous 
of  princes.  So  it  must  have  been  he  who  gave  our  singer  his 
most  precious  gift.  Finally,  as  Moller  read  the  poem,  Eadgils 
was  the  husband  of  Ealhhild,  and  consequently  brother-in-law 
of  ^Elfwine.  "  The  singer  after  his  return  would  have  pre 
sented  to  his  lord  the  gift  of  an  allied  and  related  prince,  not 
of  any  other." 

This  last  argument  is  certainly  unsound.  Teutonic  custom 
allowed  the  passing  on  of  a  gift  from  one  great  chief  to  another, 
without  postulating  any  friendship  between  them.  Besides, 
we  have  seen  that  the  supposed  relationship  between  ^Elfwine 
and  Eadgils  is  an  entirely  baseless  assumption1.  The  first 
argument  is  without  weight  to  those  of  us  who  hold  the  whole 
of  Widsith's  travels  for  an  epic  fiction.  The  second  argument, 
that  our  poet  graduated  his  scale  of  praise  exactly  in  accord 
ance  with  the  supposed  generosity  of  the  chiefs,  can  hardly  be 
maintained  seriously.  Eormanric,  "more  cunning  than  all  in 
guile,  more  generous  in  gift2/'  could  not  be  praised  as  enthu 
siastically  as  ^Elfwine,  though  he  might  be  represented  as 
giving  Widsith  an  even  more  magnificent  gift. 

Yet  on  these  grounds  Moller,  by  transferring  certain  lines 
from  one  section  of  the  poem  to  the  other,  excluded  the  name 
of  Eormanric  from  the  Ealhhild  lay,  and  made  ^Elfwine  the 
donor  of  the  precious  armlet3. 

Holler's  dissection  of  the  poem  commanded  in  general,  as 
we  have  seen,  the  assent  of  Mlillenhoff.  It  was  also  followed, 
in  its  main  details,  by  Ten  Brink.  Individual  lines,  which 
Moller  had  cast  out,  because  they  interfered  with  his  arrange 
ment  of  the  poem  in  strophes,  were  indeed  readmitted  by  Ten 
Brink,  who  owed  no  allegiance  to  this  metrical  theory.  And 
in  one  point  particularly  Ten  Brink  greatly  improved  upon 
Moller's  scheme.  He  recognized  the  close  relationship  which 

1  Se.e  above,  p.  21  etc.  2  See  above,  p.  34.  3  V.E.  3,  9. 

9—2 


132  Widsith 

exists  between  the  second  and  third  sections  of  the  poem,  as 
divided  by  Moller ;  the  Ealhhild  lay  and  the  Ermanaric  cata 
logue.  So  close  a  connection  could  only  be  accounted  for, 
he  thought,  by  their  having  been  early  fused  into  one  poem  : 
lines  had  been  transferred  from  the  one  to  the  other,  and  the 
two  poems  had  become  so  wound  together  that  it  was  difficult 
to  separate  them  with  any  certainty1 ;  and  they  had  been  so 
combined,  he  held,  since  the  latter  half  of  the  seventh  century2. 

Ten  Brink  followed  Moller  in  regarding  the  Offa  episode  as 
a  later  addition  to  the  catalogue  of  kings,  but  one  made,  per 
haps,  whilst  the  Angles  were  still  on  the  continent3. 

One  may  doubt  whether  it  is  possible  for  any  critic,  how 
ever  brilliant,  to  trace  the  minute  history  of  a  poem  so  far 
back  into  heathen  times.  But  it  should  be  noted  that,  in 
Ten  Brink's  opinion,  the  compiler  who,  perhaps  in  the  eighth 
century,  put  our  poem  together  in  its  present  form,  had  before 
him  only  two  songs  :  on  the  one  hand  the  catalogue  of  kings 
together  with  the  Offa  and  Hrothgar  episodes,  and  on  the  other 
hand  the  contaminated  lay  of  Ealhhild-Eormanric.  Both  of 
these,  whatever  their  ultimate  origin,  Ten  Brink  believed  to 
have  been  complete  poems  for  some  generations. 

In  Ten  Brink's  view  Ealhhild  was  the  wife  of  Eadgils :  her 
relation  to  Eormanric  was  negligible :  she  had  on  one  occasion 
visited  his  court.  Hence  he  naturally  regarded  the  Ealhhild 
and  the  Eormanric  episodes  as  distinct  in  origin,  although  very 
early  brought  together.  Now  we  have  seen  that  the  balance 
of  probability  is  strongly  in  favour  of  Ealhhild  being,  not  the 
wife  of  Eadgils,  but,  as  suggested  by  Heinzel4,  another  form  of 
Sonhild  or  Swanhild,  the  luckless  wife  of  Ermanaric.  But, 
if  Ealhhild  is  to  be  identified  with  Swanhild,  who  has  no 
existence  in  story  apart  from  Ermanaric,  it  is  absurd  to  con 
tinue  to  speak  of  an  Ealhhild  lay  and  an  Eormanric  lay  as 
distinct.  The  second  and  third  sections  of  the  poem  must  be 
one  lay.  And  here  comes  in  the  importance  of  Ten  Brink's 

1  P.  540.  2  P.  544.  3  P.  539. 

4  W.S.B.  cxiv,  514-16.  See  above,  p.  22  etc.  It  is  not  necessary  for  the 
argument  that  Ealhhild  should  be  Swanhild,  but  only  that  she  should  be  wife 
of  Eormanric.  And  so  much,  at  least,  seems  fairly  certain. 


Widsith  and  the  Critics  133 

conviction,  that  the  Ealhhild  lay  and  the  Eormanric  lay  are  not 
distinguishable  in  metre  and  style.  His  adherence  to  the  old 
view  that  Ealhhild  is  Eadgils'  wife  forced  him  to  regard  these 
two  sections  as  originally  distinct  lays.  When,  in  spite  of  this 
presupposition,  he  recognizes  their  remarkable  likeness1,  we 
have  evidence  of  the  greatest  value :  for  it  is  that  of  an  able 
critic  given,  not  in  support  of,  but  in  opposition  to,  his  pre 
conceived  theories.  In  order  to  make  the  phenomena  of  the 
poem  fit  these  theories,  and  to  build  up  a  distinction  between  the 
Ealhhild  and  Eormanric  lays,  Ten  Brink  had  to  transfer  lines 
from  the  one  section  to  the  other. 

At  least  then  from  line  50  to  line  130  the  poem  would  seem 
to  be  a  fairly  consistent  whole.  It  may  be  compounded  of 
various  elements,  and  it  is  probable  enough  that  reminiscences 
of  a  dozen  different  lays  lie  behind  it.  But  everything  has  been 
so  fused  and  absorbed  that  it  is  impossible  for  us  to  distinguish 
the  different  strata,  or  to  subdivide  the  poem  further2.  We 
cannot  follow  Ten  Brink  in  venturing  back  into  the  remote 
past,  and  showing  how  the  seventh  century  poet  put  the 
Ealhhild- Eormanric  lay  together ;  we  have  not  evidence  enough 
to  do  so3.  All  we  can  do  is  to  mark  as  doubtful  any  lines  like 
the  'Biblical'  passage,  which  seem  to  indicate  a  date  later 
than  that  of  the  bulk  of  the  poem. 

But  are  we  justified  in  following  Ten  Brink  in  maintaining 
a  distinction  between  this  Ealhhild-Eormanric  lay  on  the  one 
hand,  and  the  preceding  catalogue  of  kings  (11.  10-49)  on 
the  other  ? 

Here,  I  think,  a  further  examination  entirely  bears  out  Ten 
Brink's  theory.  There  is  a  clear  break  in  the  continuity  of 
the  poem  at  1.  50 4.  Swa,  in  view  of  what  has  preceded,  makes 
no  sense.  And  the  passage  which  precedes  is  of  a  different 
character  from  that  which  follows. 

The  catalogue  of  kings  is  an  impersonal  list :  the  Ealhhild- 
Eormanric  lay  is  a  personal  narrative.  They  have  no  organic 

1  Pauls  Grdr.d)  ir,  540-541.     Compare  for  example  11.  68,  69,  with  U.  113, 
114. 

2  Always,  of  course,  excepting  the  late  "  Biblical"  interpolation. 

3  For  an  opinion  to  the  contrary  see  Schiitte,  Oldsagn,  47. 

4  See  note  to  that  line,  and  cf.  Moller,  V.E.  34. 


134  Widsith 

connection ;  to  print  them  as  separate  poems  would  not  involve 
the  change  of  a  single  word.  And  there  are  serious  dis 
crepancies  between  them. 

Whereas  the  scop  of  the  Ealhhild-Eormanric  lay  owns  for  his 
lord  Eadgils,  prince  of  the  Myrgings,  the  poet  of  the  catalogue 
of  kings  mentions  with  pride  the  victory  of  Offa  over  the 
Myrgings  at  Fifeldor.  Old  Germanic  literature  is  chivalrously 
ready  to  applaud  valour,  on  whichever  side  displayed  :  but  the 
exultant  reference  to  Offa's  victory  cannot  have  been  intended 
to  have  been  put  into  the  mouth  of  Widsith,  who  is  represented 
as  belonging  to  the  defeated  foemen. 

In  the  catalogue  of  kings  Gifica  rules  the  Burgundians, 
Meaca  the  Myrgings,  Sceafa  the  Lombards.  In  the  Ealhhild- 
Eormanric  portion  Guthhere  rules  the  Burgundians,  Eadgils 
the  Myrgings,  Eadwine  and  JElfwine  the  Lombards.  The 
^Elfwine  passage  has  been  thought  by  many  critics  to  be  a 
later  interpolation.  Granting  that  it  is,  the  contrast  is  still 
sufficiently  striking  between  the  at  least  half-historical  figures 
of  Eadgils  and  Guthhere  and  the  apparently  quite  mythical 
figures  of  Gifica,  Meaca,  Sceafa. 

It  may  be  said  that  there  is  here  an  intentional  distinction. 
The  first  list  enumerates  mythical  kings  of  old  time  of  whom 
the  poet  has  but  heard  ;  the  other  enumerates  those  semi- 
historical  figures  who  were  nearer  his  own  day,  whom  his 
Widsith  has  actually  seen1.  But  on  this  hypothesis  it  would 
be  difficult  to  account  for  the  inclusion  of  JEtla  and  Eormanric 
in  both  lists. 

Again,  in  the  first  list  the  Burgundians  are  apparently 
thought  of  in  their  old  eastern  seat  by  the  Goths ;  in  the 
second,  under  Guthhere,  they  must  have  been  on  the  Rhine. 
Sceafa  in  the  first  list  assumes  (perhaps)  the  old  Lombard 
home  by  the  sea ;  ^Elfwine  in  the  second  list  rules  the  Lom 
bards  in  Italy.  The  reference  to  the  Rugians  in  the  first  list 

1  Cf.  Heinzel,  A.f.d.A.  x,  232.  Heinzel,  reviewing  Moller's  work,  refuses  to 
accept  his  view  of  three  lays  welded  together.  He  admits  two  lays  only  :  roughly 
the  catalogue  of  kings  and  the  champions  of  Ermanaric.  The  lay  of  Ealhhild  he 
divides  between  the  two.  But  the  effect  of  this  division  of  the  Ealhhild  lay  is  to 
separate  the  praise  of  ./Elfwine  from  that  of  his  sister  Ealhhild.  It  is  much 
easier  to  take  the  whole  of  the  "  Ealhhild  lay "  with  the  "  champions  of 
Ermanaric." 


Widsith  and  the  Critics  135 

assumes  that  they  are  a  seafaring  folk :  in  the  second  list  they 
are  mentioned  together  with  the  Romans  ;  a  reminiscence,  it 
may  be,  of  the  days  when  they  ruled  in  Italy  together  with  the 
Ostrogoths.  The  variance  in  these  two  last  instances  is  how 
ever  too  hypothetical  to  have  more  than  a  slight  subsidiary 
value. 

Only  one  of  these  discrepancies  is  in  itself  very  convincing  : 
but  taken  together,  in  the  bulk,  they  seem  to  indicate  a 
difference1,  both  in  age  and  character,  such  as  that  which  Ten 
Brink  postulated,  between  the  catalogue  of  kings  and  the 
Ealhhild-Eormanric  lay. 

Further,  the  phenomena  of  the  poem  justify  the  distinction 
which  Ten  Brink  made  between  the  catalogue  of  kings  proper, 
and  the  lines  celebrating  Offa  and  Hrothgar,  which  he  regarded 
as  later  excrescences  upon  that  list.  For  in  the  catalogue 
proper  one  king  only  is  allotted  to  each  tribe :  Sigehere  ruled 
the  Danes.  When  we  find  a  second  Danish  king  Alewih,  and 
a  third  and  fourth  Hrothgar  and  Hrothwulf,  it  is  manifest  that 
they  interfere  with  the  scheme  of  the  original  list,  and  probable 
that  they  are  additions  to  that  list  made  by  a  later  hand2. 

Merits  of  the  older  criticism. 

The  view  expressed  above  that  the  poem  falls  into  two 
divisions,  the  catalogue  of  kings,  and  the  Eormanric-Ealhhild 
lay,  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  views  of  the  earlier  critics, 
Miillenhoff,  Moller,  and  Ten  Brink.  Indeed,  it  develops  out  of 
these  views  inevitably,  so  soon  as  we  abandon  the  unjustifiable 
assumption  of  these  older  critics  that  Ealhhild  is  the  wife 
of  Eadgils. 

In  recent  years  a  reaction  against  the  school  of  Miillenhoff 
has  set  in.  So  far  as  this  reaction  is  a  protest  against  the  too 

1  Of.  Schiitte,  Oldsagn,  47  ;  for  arguments  to  the  contrary,  Heinzel  as  above. 

2  Mention  should  perhaps  be  made  of  the  view,  originally  suggested  by 
Ettmuller(2),  211,  that  Widsith  is  an  episode,  a  fragment  from  some  longer  epic. 
This  was  also  held  by  Wright  (Biog.  Brit.  1842,  i,  4),  Thorpe  (Cod.  Ex.  512-3) 
and  Klipstein  (n,  422).     None  of  them  produced  any  arguments  in  favour  of 
this  theory :   yet  they  were  right  in  feeling  that  Widsith  is  no  isolated  phe 
nomenon,  but  one  fragment  which  has  been  saved  from  a  great  body  of  story 
which  has  been  lost. 


136  Widsith 

great  certainty  sometimes  claimed  by  that  school  for  its  results, 
it  is  justified.  But,  on  the  whole,  a  comparison  of  the  methods 
and  results  of  Miillenhoff  and  his  contemporaries  with  those  of 
some  of  their  critics  is  in  favour  of  the  earlier  school.  The 
results  of  the  older  students  of  Widsith,  up  to  and  including 
Ten  Brink,  represent  a  consistent  evolution,  resulting  from 
many  years  of  patient  study  and  interchange  of  ideas.  No 
man's  work  breaks  violently  away  from  that  of  his  predecessor. 
The  views  of  Kemble,  Leo,  Miillenhoff  in  1844,  Miillenhoff 
again  in  1859,  Rieger,  Moller,  Miillenhoff  a  third  time  as 
published  in  1889,  and  Ten  Brink  all  develop  quite  naturally 
the  one  out  of  the  other. 

Certainly,  in  their  later  stages,  these  views  become  some 
what  complicated.  But  it  is  no  true  objection  to  the  theories 
of  Miillenhoff,  Moller  and  Ten  Brink  to  say  that  they  are 
"  complicated."  Of  course  they  are,  ex  hypothesi.  These  critics 
believed  that  the  old  English  poems  had  had  a  complicated 
past ;  and  who  will  deny  that  much  lies  between  the  defeat  of 
Chochilaicus  and  MS  Cotton  Vitellius  A.  xv  ?  A  complicated 
theory  of  how  Widsith  might  have  arisen  may  not  be  con 
vincing  in  every  detail.  But  if  it  shows  us  the  way  in  which 
the  poem  might  have  grown  up,  it  is  surely  better  than  a 
theory  of  artificial  simplicity  which  does  not  correspond  to  the 
complicated  and  sometimes  even  contradictory  traces  of  date 
and  origin  which  our  poem  bears. 

Recent  Criticism  of  Widsith. 

The  study  on  the  style  and  interpretation  of  Widsith  re 
cently  published  by  Dr  W.  W.  Lawrence1  is  characterized  by 
this  distrust  of  the  methods  of  the  older  school. 

The  elaborate  patchwork  theory  of  Ten  Brink,  who  distinguishes  in 
the  piece  four  separate  lays,  not  including  introductory  and  connecting 
material,  has  never  been  adequately  criticised  and  refuted,  although  the 
general  weakness  of  his  method  is  apparently  coming  more  and  more  to 
be  recognized2.... 

It  is  not  so  difficult  for  an  unprejudiced  person  to  admit  that  some 
such  additions  as  Miillenhoff  describes  may  have  crept  into  Widsith,  how 
ever  unlikely  he  may  think  it  that  Miillenhoff  succeeded  in  denning  their 
limits  with  certainty3. 

1  In  Mod.  Philol.  iv,  1907,  pp.  329  etc. 

2  P.  332.  »  P.  342. 


Widsith  and  the  Critics  137 

But  Mullenhoff  did  not  claim  to  have  defined  these  limits 
with  certainty.  On  the  contrary,  he  frequently  declared  that 
this  cannot  be  done.  Miillenhoff,  like  other  critics  of  the 
"dissecting  school,"  was  often  very  definite  in  his  theories: 
but  the  willingness  which  he  showed  to  reconsider  these 
theories  acquits  him  of  any  charge  of  undue  dogmatism.  It  is 
not  sufficiently  realized  that  this  definiteness  of  theory  is  the 
only  alternative  to  a  vagueness  and  confused  thinking  which 
must  ensue,  if  we  argue  about  interpolations'without  defining 
to  ourselves  their  exact  scope.  It  is  therefore  the  duty  of 
a  critic  who  believes  a  poem  or  play  to  be  the  work  of  several 
hands,  to  form  a  hard  and  definite  theory,  consistent  with  the 
facts  that  he  has  noted.  The  law  of  chance  is  against  his  theory 
being  right  in  every  detail.  But  a  critic  who  is  quite  clear  in 
his  own  mind  as  to  exactly  what  he  is  trying  to  prove  may 
often  prove  his  general  theory,  even  though  we  are  in  doubt  as 
to  many  of  the  details.  If  he  confines  himself  to  generalities 
he  will  prove  nothing. 

For  example,  Mb'ller  thought  he  detected  traces  of  a  strophic 
system  in  the  Old  English  epic,  and  he  accordingly  published 
a  Beowulf,  arranged  in  four-line  strophes.  He  cannot  have 
hoped  that  his  reconstruction  reproduced  exactly  the  original 
Beowulf.  Yet  his  method  was  right  enough,  for  the  only  way 
of  testing  his  theory  was  to  attempt  such  reconstruction,  and 
to  see  how  it  worked  out.  Most  critics  will  agree  that  it 
works  out  badly ;  that  it  involves  too  much  violation  of  the 
text.  But  Moller  did  a  service  by  demonstrating  how  much 
violation  of  our  existing  text  is  necessary  in  order  to  force 
Beowulf  into  strophic  form. 

Rejecting  the  theories  of  the  origin  of  the  poem  evolved  by 
Mullenhoff,  Moller,  and  Ten  Brink,  Dr  Lawrence  gives  a  study 
of  Widsith  of  which  the  general  principles  are  indicated  by  the 
following  extracts  : 

If  Widsith  is  inferior  in  poetic  quality  to  other  pieces  of  lyric  character 
in  Anglo-Saxon,  it  is  by  no  means  wholly  lacking  in  this  respect.  The 
passage  describing  the  singer's  relations  with  his  lord  Eadgils  and  with 
queen  Ealhhild  (11.  88  ff.)  serves  to  indicate  what  the  general  tone  of  the 
poem  in  an  earlier  form  may  have  been.  For,  as  will  be  seen,  closer  study 


138  Widsith 

shows  that  it  has  been  much  overlaid  and  defaced  by  the  addition  of 
inferior  material,  like  a  Gothic  building  rudely  modernized  with  bricks 
and  mortar1.... 

We  shall  surely  not  err  in  looking  to  this  thread  of  story  for  the 
earlier  material  at  the  basis  of  the  poem,  rather  than  to  the  lists  of  names, 
etc.  which  precede.  Instances  of  expanding  a  tale  by  the  interpolation  of 
inferior  matter  are  common  enough,  but  to  enliven  cataloguing  by  the 
composition  of  epic  verse  dealing  with  different  material,  and  telling 
a  separate  story,  is,  so  far  as  I  am  aware,  unheard  of.  It  seems  reason 
able,  then,  to  regard  much  of  this  ethnological  tediousness  as  a  later 
addition  to  the  main  theme,  having  crowded  out  earlier  portions  of  the 
poem,  so  that  the  real  narrative  of  Widsith's  adventures  is  preserved  in  a 
fragmentary  condition  only2.... 

One  would  like  to  believe  that  the  references  to  Guflhere  (11.  64-67) 
and  to  ./Elfwine  (11.  70-74)  formed  originally  a  part  of  the  same  story 
as  11.  88  ff.,  as  they  are  similar  to  it  in  style  and  metre,  and  unlike 
the  material  in  which  they  are  imbedded.  It  is  almost  impossible  to 
resist  the  conclusion  that  there  is  here  preserved  some  of  the  good  old 
piece  which  formed  the  nucleus  of  the  present  poem,  much  mutilated  and 
interpolated,  indeed,  but  still  showing  its  presence,  wherever  it  remains, 
by  its  superiority  to  the  matter  which  surrounds  it3. 

But  is  not  this  open  to  the  very  objection  which  Dr  Law 
rence  brings  against  the  school  of  Mullenhoff :  that  of  "  depen 
dence  upon  subjective  and  a  priori  conceptions  of  Anglo-Saxon 
style"?  Who  is  to  decide  what  is  inferior  matter,  and  what 
better  material  ?  And  why  should  the  better  be  necessarily 
old,  the  inferior  new  ? 

Mullenhoff  and  his  school  did  sometimes,  it  is  true,  reject 
a  passage  for  no  other  reason  than  that  it  appeared  to  them 
inferior,  and  therefore,  they  argued,  was  later.  But,  generally, 
their  criticism  depended  upon  a  number  of  discrepancies,  found 
in  the  course  of  a  minute  study  of  details  of  ethnology,  heroic 
lore,  dialect,  and  metre.  In  so  far  as  it  depended  upon  these 
things  it  was  more  reliable  than  the  criticism  which  threatens 
to  replace  it,  which  is  based,  to  a  much  greater  degree,  upon 
the  personal  impression  of  the  critic. 

Why  should  the  superiority  in  style  or  interest  of  the 
passages  dealing  with  the  generosity  of  Guthhere,  ^Elfwine, 
Eormanric,  Eadgils,  and  Ealhhild  prove  these  passages  to  con 
stitute  parts  of  the  original  poem  ? 

And  does  such  superiority  exist  ?  True,  a  modern  reader 
will  find  these  parts  more  interesting  than  those  which  are 
crowded  with  names.  But  this  is  because  he  does  not  know 

1  P.  330.  2  P.  340.  8  P.  343. 


Widsith  and  the  Critics  139 

the  stories,  and  therefore  the  poet's  allusions  awake  no  echo  in 
his  mind.  Working  on  this  principle,  a  modern  Bentley  might 
eject  much  "  inferior  matter  "  from  the  text  of  Milton  : 

Nymphs  of  Diana's  train,  and  Naiades 
With  fruits  and  flowers  from  Amalthea's  horn, 
And  Ladies  of  th'  Hesperides,  that  seem'd 
Fairer  than  feign'd  of  old,  or  fabl'd  since 
Of  Fairy  Damsels  met  in  Forest  wide 
By  Knights  of  Logres,  or  of  Lyones, 
Lancelot  or  Pelleas,  or  Pellenore. 

Mid  Rugum  ic  wees  and  mid  Glommum  is  a  statement 
which,  to  a  modern  reader,  may  be  devoid  of  interest.  But 
there  was  a  time  when  the  naming  of  Rugians  and  Glommas  in 
the  same  breath  would  have  sufficed  to  call  up  one  of  the  most 
glorious  of  the  old  tales.  It  is  our  misfortune  that  many  of  the 
lines  no  longer  give  up  their  secrets  to  us  ;  it  is  our  fault  if  we 
therefore  condemn  them.  And  our  poem  shows  no  little  art  in 
the  way  names  are  grouped  so  as  to  recall  the  old  stories,  and 
the  monotony  of  the  lists  is  varied  by  occasional  rhyme  or 
transposition  : 

peodric  weold  Froncum,  pyle  Rondingum, 
Breoca  Brondingum,  Billing  Wernum. 
Oswine  weold  Eowum  and  Ytum  Qefwulf, 
Fin  Folcwalding  Fresna  cynne. 
Sigehere  longest  Sae-Denum  weold, 
Hnaef  Hocingum,  Helm  Wulfingum, 
Wald  Woingum,  Wod  pyringum, — 

I  cannot  call  verse  like  this  'inferior' — the  poet  seems  to  me 
to  have  accomplished  a  difficult  task  extraordinarily  well.  Still 
less  can  these  lists  of  names  be  condemned  as  '  late.'  On  the 
contrary,  it  is  in  virtue  of  the  proper  names,  and  of  these  only, 
that  so  many  critics  have  pronounced  Widsith  the  earliest  of 
all  English  poems.  For  these  names  of  kings  and  tribes  show 
an  extraordinary  knowledge  of  the  old  stories;  Maldon,  on 
the  other  hand,  shows  us  how  the  old  commonplaces  were 
applied  to  a  new  generation  of  heroes,  and  how  descriptions  of 
the  bestowal  of  rings  might  have  been  written  during  the  latest 
period  of  the  Old  English  epic. 

Indeed,  Dr  Lawrence  admits  that  some  of  the  interpolated 
passages  "  may  have  existed  previously,  and  may  be  as  old  as 
the  narrative  portion,  or  even  older."  But,  if  this  is  so,  we  are 


140  Widsith 

driven  back  to  the  old  theory  of  the  contamination  of  two  or 
more  lays.  I  cannot  see  how  the  poem  can  be  compared  to 
"  a  Gothic  building  rudely  modernized  with  bricks  and  mortar  " 
if  the  bricks  and  mortar  form  a  building  which  is  in  some  cases 
as  old  as  or  even  older  than  the  Gothic  building  itself.  It  is 
the  great  merit  of  the  clearly  defined  theories  of  Mb'ller  and 
Ten  Brink  that,  by  their  very  dogmatism,  they  saved  the  critic 
from  the  danger  of  self-contradiction1. 

How  contradictory  recent  criticism  of  the  poem  has  proved, 
when  compared  with  the  criticism  of  the  school  of  Miillenhoff, 
is  shown  by  the  fact  that  Professor  Brandl  singles  out  as  the 
oldest  element  in  the  poem  just  those  lists  of  names  which 
Dr  Lawrence  regards  as  the  modern  bricks  and  mortar2. 

The  poem,  Professor  Brandl  thinks,  may  have  been  put  into 
its  present  form  in  the  eighth  century.  It  was  constructed  out 
of  three  old  mnemonic  catalogues,  which  can  be  distinguished 
by  their  style  from  the  story  of  Widsith  the  wanderer,  in  which 
they  are  framed. 

We  have  seen  that  there  is  reason  for  thinking  that  the 
catalogue  of  kings  is  such  a  mnemonic  list,  and  that  it  betrays 
its  origin  by  certain  inconsistencies  when  compared  with  the 
rest  of  the  poem.  In  fact,  as  Ten  Brink  said,  11.  18-34  are 
"  uralte  versus  memoriales." 

But  that  the  two  other  catalogues,  of  peoples  and  of 
Eormanric's  champions,  are  to  be  distinguished  from  each 
other,  and  from  the  narrative  in  which  each  is  imbedded,  is  not 
so  clear.  No  doubt  there  is  a  difference  in  style  between  the 
narrative  and  the  lists.  How  Widsith  sang  in  the  hall  of 
Eadgils  is  told  in  the  manner  which  the  Old  English  poets 
love  :  in  lines  following  the  one  upon  the  other,  with  sense 
variously  drawn  out.  On  the  other  hand,  the  names  of  the 
tribes  and  champions  he  visited  are  enumerated  in  the  most 
rapid  way.  But  are  we  justified  in  assuming  that  the  verse  of 
an  Old  English  bard  was  always  of  one  pattern,  and  that  the 

1  Whilst  dissenting  from  Dr  Lawrence's  results,  I  wish  to  express  my  keen 
appreciation  of  his  most  useful  essay.     No  one  before  Dr  Lawrence  seems  to 
have  sufficiently  appreciated  the  importance  of  Heinzel's  work  on  the  subject. 

2  Pauls  Grdr.fa)  n,  1,  966-69. 


Widsith  and  the  Critics  141 

same  man  could  not  be  terse  in  writing  a  catalogue,  diffuse  in 
singing  a  chieftain's  praise  ?  If  not,  then  arguments  drawn 
from  dissimilarity  of  style  cannot  rank  with  arguments  based 
upon  differences  of  tradition  and  outlook,  such  as  we  have  seen 
separate  the  catalogue  of  kings  from  the  rest  of  the  poem. 

Excluding  this  catalogue  of  kings  (18-49)  and,  of  course, 
the  later  interpolations,  the  poem  seems  homogeneous  enough. 
It  is  of  course  quite  possible  that  Professor  Brandl  is  right,  and 
that  between  our  poem,  and  the  mass  of  lays  of  the  Eormanric 
and  other  cycles  which  lie  behind  it,  there  may  intervene  some 
heroic  catalogues  of  champions  or  of  peoples1.  But  I  do  not 
think  this  has  been  demonstrated.  It  is  not  clear  that  the 
same  poet  who  depicted  the  figure  of  Widsith  the  traveller 
could  not  have  drawn  up  these  lists  for  himself  from  the  lays 
which  he  knew. 

However  widely  they  may  differ  as  to  what  are  the  old  and 
what  the  more  modern  parts  of  the  poem,  Professor  Brandl  and 
Dr  Lawrence  agree  in  regarding  the  story  of  Widsith  as  ficti 
tious.  Mr  Chadwick,  in  his  recent  study  of  the  poem2,  returns 
to  the  old  point  of  view  of  Guest  and  Haigh,  Kemble  and 
Conybeare : 

Any  hypothesis  which  would  represent  the  minstrel  as  a  fictitious 
character  is  open  to  the  objection  that,  in  that  case,  he  would  hardly  have 
been  associated  with  so  obscure  a  person  as  Eadgils,  prince  of  the 
Myrgiugas,  a  family  not  mentioned  except  in  this  poem3.  On  the  whole, 
then,  the  hypothesis  that  the  kerneji  of  the  poem  is  really  the  work  of  an 
unknown  fourth  century  minstrel,  who  did  visit  the  court  of  Eormenric, 
seems  to  involve  fewer  difficulties  than  any  other.  In  that  case,  of 
course,  such  passages  as  11.  82  ff.  must  be  regarded  as  merely  the  last 
stage  in  a  process  of  accretion  which  had  been  going  on  for  some  three 
centuries. 

1  Mnemonic  verses  similar  to  those  of  Widsith  occur,  as  has  been  noted,  in 
Icelandic  :  and  it  is  important  to  note  that  they  occur  in  connection  with  the 
same  cycle  of  the  struggle  between  Goths  and  Huns.     It  might  plausibly  be 
argued  that  there  existed  in  the  late  fifth  or  early  sixth  century  a  poem  in  which 
this  great  fight  was  made  the  occasion  of  an  "heroic  muster  roll"  similar  to 
that  which  in  later  times  was  attached  to  the  story  of  the  battle  of  Bravalla : 
that  from  this  ancient  poem  much  of  the  tradition  of  Widsith,  of  the  Hervarar 
Saga  and  of  the  ' '  Lay  of  Hloth  and  Angantyr "  is  derived,  and  that  faint 
echoes  of  it  are  to  be  found  in  the  Elene  and  in  Saxo. 

2  In  the  Cambridge  History  of  Literature,  i,  36. 

8  Whatever  might  be  the  force  of  this  argument  if  any  considerable  propor 
tion  of  O.E.  heroic  poetry  were  extant,  it  cn,n  hardly  count  for  much  considering 
how  few  fragments  have  survived. 


142  Widsith 

With  this  view  I  cannot  agree.  It  is  not  merely  that  almost 
every  allusion  which  we  can  date — and  there  are  many — shows 
it  to  be  a  chronological  impossibility  that  the  poem,  as  we  have 
it,  should  record  the  real  travels  of  a  real  scop1.  This  difficulty 
might  perhaps  be  evaded  by  a  sufficiently  thoroughgoing  appli 
cation  of  the  interpolation-theory.  But  the  visit  to  Ermanaric, 
in  which  Mr  Chadwick  himself  finds  the  original  kernel  of 
Widsith's  wanderings,  is  depicted  in  an  atmosphere  not  of 
history,  but  of  heroic  legend. 

The  Ermanaric  of  history  ruled  a  mighty  empire :  only  at 
the  very  end  of  his  long  reign  did  the  Huns  appear,  and  he 
slew  himself  before  the  contest  between  his  people  and  the 
Huns  reached  its  climax.  But  in  heroic  story  it  is  the  chief 
business  of  Ermanaric  and  his  men  to  fight  against  the  hosts  of 
Attila,  who  as  a  matter  of  history  is  younger  by  two  genera 
tions.  And  it  is  this  heroic  fiction  which  we  see  reflected  in 
Widsith.  A  real  visitor  to  the  court  of  Ermanaric  would 
probably  have  had  nothing  to  say  about  the  Huns,  since  their 
ravages  belong  only  to  the  last  episode  in  Ermanaric's  life. 
Had  he  mentioned  them,  he  could  not  have  represented  the 
Goths  as  fighting  them  in  the  Vistula  wood,  which  they  had 
left  some  generations  earlier2 ;  neither  would  he  have  repre 
sented  the  Huns  as  "  the  people  of  Attila."  Neither  could  he 
have  met  in  his  visit  to  the  land  of  the  Goths  the  champions 
whom  he  names.  Even  when  we  have  condemned  as  inter 
polations  and  excluded  the  names  of  ^Egelmund  and  Eadwine, 
or  even  Theodric  or  Freotheric,  our  list  is  still  an  impossible 
one.  It  includes  Eastgota  and  his  son  Unwen,  who  had  been 
dead  for  generations  when  the  Huns  appeared ;  it  includes 
Wudga,  probably  the  foe,  not  of  the  Huns,  but  of  the  Sarmatians. 
The  mention  of  the  Harlung  brethren  points  to  the  legendary 
Ermanaric,  the  slayer  of  his  kin,  rather  than  to  the  conqueror- 
tyrant  of  history.  The  most  important  person  in  the  poem  is 
Ealhhild,  and  if  she  be  Eormanric's  murdered  wife,  she  belongs 
to  legend  and  not  to  history.  Reject  all  these  things  as  inter 
polations,  and  what  have  we  left  ? 

Again,  the  evidence  that  the  catalogue  of  kings  is  older 
1  See  above,  p.  5.  2  See  below,  p.  163. 


Widsith  and  the  Critics  143 

than  the  story  of  Widsith's  wanderings  seems  conclusive.  Yet 
the  catalogue  of  kings  can  hardly  be  older  than  the  sixth 
century,  since  it  includes  the  name  of  the  Frankish  Theodoric  ; 
to  say  nothing  of  other  chiefs,  like  Attila,  who  are  much  later 
than  the  period  of  Ermanaric. 

Most  of  these  facts  have  long  been  known :  they  were  so 
well  known  to  Ten  Brink  and  Miillenhoff  that  these  critics 
often  assumed  them  to  be  known  to  their  readers  also,  and 
thought  it  unnecessary  to  instance  them :  a  reticence  which 
has  given  an  undue  appearance  of  dogmatism  to  their  state 
ments. 

These  difficulties  seem  to  me  insuperable.  Yet  they  are 
only  one  portion  of  those  that  have  to  be  faced,  if  we  are  to 
believe  that  the  kernel  of  our  poem  actually  dates  back  to  the 
fourth  century.  But  Mr  Chad  wick  regards  this  date  as  in 
volving  fewer  difficulties  than  the  objection  that,  if  the  minstrel 
were  a  fictitious  character,  he  would  not  have  been  associated 
with  so  obscure  a  person  as  Eadgils.  Yet  he  has  himself  shown 
how  baseless  this  objection  is.  For  if,  as  is  exceedingly  probable, 
and  as  Mr  Chad  wick  himself  holds1,  Eadgils  is  the  Athislus  of 
Saxo's  Fourth  Book,  then  he  can  have  been  by  no  means  an 
obscure  person,  to  have  been  remembered,  eight  centuries  after 
his  death,  in  popular  tradition,  as  a  king  "  of  notable  fame  and 
vigour":  vir  fama  studioque  conspicuus*. 

During  the  closing  weeks  of  last  year  a  study  of  Widsith 
was  published  by  Professor  Siebs3.  Whilst  Chadwick  regards 
the  Eormanric  passages  as  essential,  and  the  reference  to 
^Elfwine  as  later  accretion,  Siebs  sees  the  kernel  of  the  poem 
in  the  lines  on  ^Elfwine,  and  regards  the  four  passages  in  which 
Eormanric  is  referred  to  as  four  separate  additions. 

Siebs  strikes  out  as  an  interpolation  11.  88,  89 : 

And  ic  wees  mid  Eormanriee  ealle  l>rage, 
pser  me  Gotena  cyning  gode  dohte, 

together  with  the  preceding  passage.     The  name  of  ^Elfwine  is, 

1  See  above,  pp.  92-94,  and  Chadwick  (135). 

2  Saxo,  iv  (ed.  Holder,  p.  107). 

3  Festschrift  Vietor,  Marburg,  1910,  pp.  296-309. 


144  Widsith 

by  this  means,  brought  into  immediate  contact  with  the  episode 
describing  the  gift  of  the  beag1.  This,  according  to  Siebs,  is 
the  nucleus  of  Widsith  :  a  short  poem  telling  how  (not  Eormanric, 
who  has  thus  been  cancelled,  but)  ^Elfwine  gave  the  minstrel 
a  gift,  how  Widsith  gave  it  on  his  return  home  to  his  lord 
Eadgils,  and  how  Ealhhild,  sister  of  ^Elfwine,  gave  him 
second  gift. 

What  I  do  not  understand  is  why  such  a  poem  as  Siebs 
constructs,  in  praise  of  ^Elfwine  and  his  sister,  should  have 
been  afterwards  interpolated  and  altered  in  the  way  he  assumes. 
I  can  understand  an  interpolator  being  supposed  to  add 
additional  episodes  to  an  epic,  additional  names  to  a  list,  in 
order  to  make  them,  as  he  conceives,  more  complete.  But  I 
do  not  understand  why,  finding  a  poem  in  praise  of  the 
generosity  of  JElfwine,  whose  glory  was,  as  Siebs  rightly  urges, 
so  widely  known,  our  interpolator  should  have  deliberately 
altered  it,  so  as  to  make  it  celebrate  the  generosity  of  Eor 
manric,  who,  though  always  reputed  munificent,  was  certainly 
also  regarded  in  England,  at  this  date,  as  a  treacherous  tyrant : 
wra}>  wcerloga,  grim  cyning*. 

It  has  been  urged  by  one  of  the  greatest  of  Homeric  critics 
that,  though  a  scholar  may  suspect  certain  passages  to  be 
interpolated,  he  can  hardly  expect  to  convince  others  unless 
he  can  show  a  reason  why  they  were  interpolated3.  Siebs  has 
still  to  show  why  an  ^Elfwine  lay  such  as  he  postulates  should 
have  been  altered  into  an  Eormanric  lay. 

1  In  this  Siebs  follows  Moller. 

2  Siebs  suggests  that  11.  88,  89  may  have  been  added  to  make  a  transition  to 
the  innweorud  Earmanrices  (1.  111).     But  11.  110-130,  on  his  own  theory,  were 
themselves  added  after  11.  88,  89.     For  they  were,  he  thinks,  added  later  than 
the  Introduction  (1-9)  (p.  807) ;  and  the  Introduction  is,  he  thinks,  later  than 
11.  88,  89,  and  is  based  upon  a  misunderstanding  of  them  (pp.  298,  300-301). 
How  then  can  11.  88,  89  have  been  added  to  make  a  transition  to  the  innweorud 
Earmanrices  (1.  Ill,  e£c.)? 

Siebs'  theory  entirely  depends  upon  his  being  able  to  prove  11.  88,  89  spurious. 
Yet  in  order  to  account  for  the  Introduction,  he  is  compelled  to  admit  them  to 
have  been  present  in  the  poem  at  a  very  early  stage.  This  admission  naturally 
renders  any  proof  of  spuriousness  exceedingly  difficult. 

3  "  Denn  die  Annahme  einer  Interpolation   kann  erst   dann  als  erwiesen 
betrachtet  werden,  wenn   eine  Veranlassung,  die  sie  hervorrief,  iiberzeugend 
dargethan  ist ;  ohne  diesen  Nachweis  bleibt  sie  ein  subjectives  Meinen,  welches 
vielleicht  nicht  widcrlegt  werden,  aber  auch  auf  keine  Beachtung  Anspruch 
machen  kann."     Kirchoff,  Composition  der  Odyssee,  1869,  p.  77.     With  this 
Ten  Brink,  Beowulf,  p.  3,  may  well  be  compared. 


Widsitk  and  the  Critics  145 

And  the  objection  that  a  passage  cannot  be  dismissed  by 
simply  declaring  it  to  be  an  interpolation  might  also  be  raised 
against  Siebs'  treatment  of  the  Introduction  (11.  1-9).  Most 
scholars  will  agree  that  Siebs  is  justified  in  regarding  this  as  a 
later  addition :  but  they  will  hardly  agree  that  he  is  therefore 
justified  in  dismissing  forthwith  what  we  are  told  in  the  Intro 
duction  regarding  Widsith's  journey  to  Eormanric  in  the  company 
of  Ealhhild.  The  Introduction  seems  to  belong  to  the  flourishing 
period  of  Old  English  poetry,  and  its  allusions  are  good  evi 
dence  that,  at  the  time  it  was  added,  Widsith's  wanderings 
were  connected  rather  with  Eormanric  than  with  ^Elfwine1. 

In  face  of  these  difficulties  very  heavy  evidence  should  be 
brought  forward,  if  it  is  to  be  proved  that  all  the  Eormanric 
passages  are  later  additions  to  an  original  ^Elfwine  lay.  What 
is  needed  is  that  a  series  of  discrepancies  between  the  Eormanric 
and  the  ^Elfwine  passages  in  syntax  or  metre  or  dialect  or 
heroic  legend  or  geography,  should  be  demonstrated,  similar 
to  those  upon  which  Mullenhoff  and  Ten  Brink  founded  their 
theories.  But  no  such  evidence  has  yet  been  produced. 

The  process  postulated  by  Siebs  has,  then,  no  likelihood  on 
a  priori  grounds,  and  is  supported  by  no  positive  evidence 
Finally,  it  leads  to  rather  incredible  results.  For,  Siebs  argues, 
if  the  starting  point  of  the  poem  was  a  song  in  praise  of  Alboin, 
this  gives  a  date  too  late  to  allow  of  a  continental  outlook : 
Eadgils  and  his  Myrgings  must,  he  concludes,  have  dwelt  in 
England  :  they  are  perhaps  identical  with  the  Mercians,  or  at 
any  rate  with  the  Mercian  royal  house. 

Now  there  is  a  good  deal  of  evidence  which  tends  to  place 
the  Myrgings  on  the  continent2,  but  Siebs  rejects  this,  on  the 
ground  that  some  of  the  proposed  identifications  are  not  philo- 
logically  exact.  Yet,  in  the  case  of  remote  names  which  are 
based  upon  epic  tradition,  some  degree  of  corruption  may  fairly 
be  expected,  and  page  upon  page  of  precedent  for  such  corruption 
might  be,  in  fact  has  been,  collected8. 

But  I  do  not  understand  how,  having  rejected  identifications 

1  See  below,  p.  151. 

2  See  above,  Eadgils  (pp.  92-94),  and  below,  the  Myrgings  (p.  159) ;  and  cf. 
notes  on  Fifeldor  (1.  43)  and  Swcefe  (1.  44). 

3  See  above,  p.  23  :  below,  p.  160  :  and  cf.  Heusler  in  Z.f.d.A.  LII,  97. 

c.  10 


146  Widsith 

such  as  those  of  the  Myrging  land  with  Maurungani,  and  Fifeldor 
with  the  Eider,  where  corruption  is  easily  intelligible,  Professor 
Siebs  can  approve,  even  tentatively,  of  an  identification  of  the 
Myrgings  with  the  Mercians.  For  this  is  just  one  of  those 
cases  where  a  phonetic  discrepancy  is  difficult  to  account  for. 
The  word  Mierce  must  have  been  familiar  to  every  eighth- 
century  Englishman.  Why  should  this  familiar  word  be  altered—" 
to  the  unintelligible  Mierging,  Myrging  ? 

But  let  this  pass.  To  balance  the  abundant  external 
evidence  favouring  a  continental  home  for  the  Myrgings,  Siebs 
produces  none  whatsoever  tending  to  support  the  explanation 
"  Mercians."  But  on  the  other  hand  there  is  heavy  evidence 
against  it.  We  are  told  "  Meaca  ruled  the  Myrgings  "  (1.  23). 
Now  we  possess  the  genealogy  of  the  Mercian  royal  house  back 
to  Woden,  but  there  is  no  Meaca  there.  And  what  of  Eadgils 
himself?  This  Mercian  genealogy  goes  back  to  the  tenth 
generation  before  Penda.  Is  it  likely  that  there  could  have 
been,  as  Siebs  thinks  possible,  an  Eadgils,  king  of  Mercia, 
only  a  decade  or  so  before  the  birth  of  Penda,  that  his  fame 
could  have  lasted  in  poetry  into  the  eighth  century  or  later, 
and  yet  no  trace  of  him  remain  either  in  the  genealogies  or 
chronicle-entries  ?  And  how  can  the  Myrgings,  if  they  are  a 
people  dwelling  in  England,  be  spoken  of  either  as  identical 
with,  or  neighbours  of,  the  Swoefe  (i.e.  Suevi)  ?  And  how  can 
Offa,  king  of  Angel,  ancestor  of  the  Mercian  house  (in  whose 
figure  in  Widsith  Prof.  Siebs  thinks  there  may  even  be 
reminiscences  of  the  historic  Offa  II,  king  of  Mercia),  be  said 
to  have  marked  off  the  borders  of  his  kingdom  wi\  Myrgingum, 
if  this  means  '  against  the  Mercians ' — his  own  people  ? 

Recent  scholarship  has  been  rather  too  ready  to  dismiss  the 
conclusions  of  earlier  students  without  sufficiently  examining 
the  facts  from  which  those  conclusions  were  drawn.  In  this,  as 
in  some  other  things,  it  hardly  compares  favourably  with  the 
school  of  Mtillenhoff,  Moller  and  Ten  Brink. 

For  each  of  these  critics  based  his  work  upon  a  careful 
study  of  his  predecessors'  investigations,  and  a  general  accept 
ance  of  their  results.  Ten  Brink's  theory  represents  in  its  main 


Widsith  and  the  Critics  147 

outline  the  gradual  evolution  of  opinion :  only  its  details  are 
the  hazardous  guesses  of  a  single  scholar.  The  view  which 
I  have  expressed  above  as  to  the  structure  of  Widsith  is  little 
more  than  an  adaptation  of  Ten  Brink's  in  its  main  outline, 
allowing  for  the  discoveries  which  have  been  made  since  his 
time,  and  for  certain  publications  issued  shortly  before  he 
wrote  but  which  he  appears  to  have  overlooked.  I  regret  that 
for  this  opinion  I  cannot  claim  the  support  of  many  recent 
critics,  to  whom  every  student  of  Old  English  is  so  much 
indebted :  but  I  have  been  pleased  to  find  that  it  is  the 
view  of  Dr  Axel  Olrik.  The  poem  has,  Dr  Olrik  thinks,  with 
reason  been  regarded  as  the  oldest  poem  of  the  German  race, 
yet  more  rightly  it  may  be  regarded  as  a  concretion  of  several 
pieces  of  old  poetry  :  the  first  of  these  is  the  "  Catalogue  of 
Kings  "  to  which  the  lines  on  Offa  and  the  lines  on  Hrothgar 
were  subsequently  added1. 

Indications  of  Date. 

In  endeavouring  to  date  Widsith,  two  extreme  courses  are  t/ 
open  to  the  critic.      He  may  refuse  to  take  into  consideration 
the  possibility  of  interpolation,  and  so  insist  upon  judging  the 
poem  exactly  as  he  finds  it.     In  this  case  he  will  clearly  have 
to  date  it  somewhat  late. 

This,  we  have  seen,  was  the  view  of  K.  Maurer : 

•I  cannot  persuade  myself  that  a  poem  which  collects  in  the  baldest  way 
the  names  of  heroes  and  people,  and  withal  goes  so  far  as  to  mingle  in  the 
most  motley  style  with  the  figures  of  Germanic  history  and  saga  Israel 
ites  and  Syrians,  Hebrews,  Indians  and  Egyptians,  Medes,  Persians  and 
Idumaeans,  Saracens  and  Seres,  Alexander  the  Great,  the  Emperor  of  the 
East,  and  a  second  emperor... can  really  date,  as  Miillenhoff  assumes,  from 
the  seventh  century2. 

Maurer  accordingly  suggested  the  age  of  the  Vikings  or  the 
beginning  of  the  ninth  century  as  more  in  accordance  with 
the  phenomena  of  the  poem.  A  similar  view  had  previously 
been  taken  by  E.  Jessen3,  who  dismissed  the  poem  as  a  mere 

1  Helte-Digtning ,  11.     I  cannot  say  whether  Dr  Olrik  would  agree  with  my 
other  contention  that  it  is  not  possible  to  divide  Widsith  further  into  component 
lays,  but  only  to  mark  off  certain  later  interpolations. 

2  Z.f.d.Ph.  n,  447  (1870). 

Undersflgelser  til  nordisk  oldhistorie,  Ktfbenhavn,  1862,  p.  51. 

10-2 


148  Widsith 

promiscuous  collection  of  some  monk  or  priest,  and  very  similar 
was  the  opinion  subsequently  expressed  by  F.  Ronning1  and  by 
A.  Erdmann2. 

But  none  of  these  students  had  devoted  any  special  atten 
tion  to  the  poem.  They  are  concerned  with  maintaining 
theories  of  different  kinds  against  which  Widsith  might  be 
quoted  as  evidence,  and  they  proceed  accordingly  to  disqualify 
that  evidence  by  judging  Widsith  on  the  merits  of  its  most 
doubtful  passage.  It  is  a  case  of  abusing  the  plaintiff's  attorney. 
Naturally,  a  scholar  who  is  seeking  to  rewrite  history,  and 
in  spite  of  Tacitus,  Bede,  Nennius  and  king  Alfred,  to  make 
the  Angles  an  inland  tribe,  finds  Widsith  one  of  the  first 
impediments  which  he  must  clear  out  of  his  way3.  Our  confi 
dence  in  Widsith  should  be  strengthened  when  we  find  that, 
the  more  paradoxical  a  critic's  views  are,  the  more  anxious  he 
is  to  attribute  a  late  date  to  the  poem. 

But  if  some  critics  have  refused  to  allow  for  interpolations, 
others  have  surely  pressed  the  theory  of  interpolations  too  far. 
They  have  started  with  the  assumption  that  the  poem,  or  at 
any  rate  the  original  kernel  of  it,  is  the  work  of  a  contemporary 
of  Ermanaric,  and  have  then  dismissed  as  interpolated  every 
passage  which  would  not  harmonize  with  this  date.  This,  as 
we  have  seen,  is  the  view  of  most  English  critics  :  of  Conybeare, 
Kemble,  Guest,  Haigh,  Stopford  Brooke,  Earle,  Garnett  and 
Chad  wick4.  The  objection  to  this  theory  is  that  it  compels 
us  to  dismiss  as  interpolations  almost  all  the  historical  data 
(and  they  are  many)  which  the  poem  affords6. 

The  extreme  dates  attributed  to  Widsith  are,  then,  nearly 

*  five  hundred  years  apart.     Yet  it  would  seem  possible  to  arrive 

at  some  approximately  accurate  results,  upon  which  the  majority 

of  critics  are  agreed.    "  A  mean  there  is  between  these  extremes, 

if  so  be  that  we  can  find  it  out." 

1  Beovulfs-Kvadet :    En   literar-historisk    undersfgelse,    Kefbenhavn,    1883. 
WidstiS...er  sikkert  et  temmelig  sent  forfattet  "register"  (p.  3;   note  2):  for- 

fattet  vi  ved  ikke  n&r  (p.  104). 

2  Heimat  der  Angeln,  p.  50. 

3  See  Appendix,  Note  E,  On  the  original  homes  of  the  Angli  and  Varini. 

4  See  above,  p.  4,  and  cf.  Lawrence  in  Mod.  Phil,  iv,  355-6. 
8  See  above,  p.  142. 


Widsith  and  the  Critics  149 

Some  criterion  is  wanted  by  which  we  can  judge  of  inter 
polations.  Perhaps  we  may  accept  the  principle  that,  in 
investigating  the  date  of  the  poem,  we  have  no  right  to  reject  a 
passage  as  interpolated  on  the  sole  ground  that  it  does  not 
agree  with  our  view  of  the  date ;  for  to  do  this  is  to  argue  in  a 
circle.  On  this  principle,  we  ought  not  to  dismiss  a  passage 
like  that  relating  to  ^Elfwine,  if  in  spirit,  metre,  and  style  it 
is  exactly  in  harmony  with  the  rest  of  the  poem  ;  but  we  should 
be  quite  justified  in  refusing  to  admit  any  argument  as  to  date 
which  is  based  on  11.  75-88.  These  lines  are  full  of  Biblical 
names,  whilst  elsewhere  we  meet  with  no  Biblical  names 
whatever  in  the  poem.  Some  of  them  cannot  be  scanned, 
whilst  elsewhere  the  poem  is  metrically  accurate.  The  whole 
spirit  and  atmosphere  is  different.  We  must  then  either  reject 
the  lines  altogether,  or  isolate  them  as  suspect. 

Every  reader  must  be  struck  by  the  knowledge  of  conti 
nental  conditions  displayed  by  the  poet ;  he  knows  the  most 
ancient  figures  of  Gothic  tradition,  Eastgota  and  Unwen,  and, 
to  judge  from  the  way  in  which  he  introduces  their  names,  he 
expects  his  audience  to  be  intimate  with  their  story.  Traits 
such  as  the  coupling  together  of  Rugians  and  Romans  seem 
reminiscent  of  the  early  sixth  century.  The  mention  of  the 
Goths  fighting  in  the  Vistula  wood  is  a  reminiscence  of  an 
earlier  period  still1.  The  poet's  interest  seems  to  centre  in  // 
continental  Angel. 

Hence   so  many  critics  have  argued  that  the   poem   was! 
composed  before  the  conquest  of  Britain.     This  however  by  no! 
means  follows.    Even  if  Widsith's  visit  to  the  Gothic  court  does' 
witness  to  a  time  when  that  court  set  the  fashion  in  minstrelsy 
to  Western  Europe  (and  we  have  seen  that  the  evidence  for 
this  Gothic  preeminence  in  song  is  insufficient2)  this  would  not 
prove  that  Widsith  must  have  been  composed  at  that  time3. 

In  a  Mercian  hall,  in  the  opening  years  of  the  seventh     $? 
century,  some  of  the  older  men  would  have  been  of  continental 

1  See  also  notes  to  11.  121-122. 

2  See  above,  p.  13. 

8  Bojunga  (P.B.B.  xvi,   548)  puts  die  dlteren  bestandteile  des   WidstiS  in 
a  time  when  the  Gothic  court  was  still  preeminent. 


150  Widsith 

birth,  and  many  more  would  be  the  sons  of  those  who  had  been 
born  in  Angel.  The  songs  sung  in  the  hall  would  still  be  the 
old  continental  lays,  the  traditions  would  be  those  of  the  sixth 
century  or  earlier,  of  Goth  and  Hun.  This  is  all  that  the  data 
of  Widsith  demand. 

Putting  aside  the  criticisms  which  would  date  the  kernel 
of  our  poem  in  the  fourth  century,  and  those  which  will  not 
allow  it  to  antedate  the  ninth,  we  find  a  considerable  measure 
of  agreement  on  the  part  of  the  more  moderate  critics.  Widsith 
is  the  oldest  English  poem  (Miillenhoff1,  Gum  mere2),  which  is 
equivalent  to  saying  the  oldest  poem  of  any  Germanic  people 
(Olrik8) ;  it  reflects  the  traditions  of  the  time  of  the  migrations 
(Jiriczek4) ;  traditions  which  the  Angles  must  have  brought 
with  them  to  England  (Leo5,  Wiilcker6,  Panzer7)  ;  belongs  in  its 
I/essential  part  mainly  to  the  seventh  century  (Symons8,  Mb'ller9, 
Miillenhoff10,  Ten  Brink u) ;  incorporating  in  the  catalogue  of 
kings  an  earlier  poem  belonging  to  the  close  of  the  period  of  the 
migrations,  the  sixth  century  (Olrik12,  Moller13,  Miillenhoff14, 
Ten  Brink16). 

These  students  have  based  their  results  upon  a  study  of  the 
heroic  traditions  of  the  poem,  including  geography  only  in  so 
far  as  that  is  necessarily  involved  by  the  heroic  traditions. 

We  may,  then,  perhaps  outline  these  as  the  results  which 
follow  from  a  study  of  the  heroic  lore  of  Widsith : 

We  have  an  exceedingly  early  poem,  belonging  probably  to 
the  seventh  century,  but  reflecting  the  traditions  of  the  fifth 

I  Z.f.d.A.  xi,  294.  2  M.L.N.  iv,  418. 

3  den  gotiskefolkestamm.es  celdste  digtning.    Helte-digtning,  11. 

4  Jiriczek  d)  110  ;  (<>)  101.  6  Sprachproben,  76. 
6  Grundriss,  329.                                                     7  H.G.  436. 

8  Pauls  Grdr.  (2)  in,  621. 

9  V.E.  18,  where  Moller  puts  "  das  eigentliche  Widsith-lied  "  after  A.D.  580. 

10  Beovulf,  93. 

II  Pauls  Grdr.  (i)  n.     Ten  Brink  puts  the  contamination  of  the  Eormanric- 
Ealhhild  lay,  which  constitutes  the  main  poem,  in  the  late  seventh  century  (544), 
though  he  thinks  the  constituent  parts  earlier  (541). 

12  forfattet  omkring  folkevandringstidens  slutning.    Helte-digtning,  11. 

13  V.E.  18  :  aus  der  mitte  oder  dem  anfang  des  sechsten  jahrhunderts. 

14  Beovulf,  92,  93.  1S  Pauls  Grdr.  d)  n,  1,  538. 


Widsith  and  the  Critics  151 

and  sixth,  and  incorporating  one  piece  of  verse,  the  Catalogue 
of  Kings,  which  seems  older  than  Widsith  proper. 

Widsith  has  been  interpolated :  and  though  it  would  be  too 
ambitious  to  hope  that  we  can  define  exactly  the  limits  of  the 
interpolations,  it  may  be  well  to  make  a  list  of  the  passages 
open  to  suspicion,  upon  which  argument  should  therefore  not 
be  based,  without  remembering  that  they  are  probably  later 
accretion.  In  this  schedule  of  suspected  passages  we  must 
place  the  Biblical  interpolation,  with  the  other  lines  condemned 
by  Miillenhoff  (11.  14-17,  75-87,  131-134)1,  and  the  not  dis 
similar  lines  which  occur  in  the  list  of  the  champions  of 
Eormanric2  (11.  117-118). 

In  view  of  the  way  in  which  the  other  secular  poems  of  the 
Exeter  book  have  been  "  edited,"  and  of  the  very  similar  pro 
logue  and  epilogue  with  which  the  Wanderer  is  furnished,  we 
are  bound  to  regard  the  prologue  and  epilogue  of  Widsith  with 
some  suspicion3.  But  I  do  not  think  we  are  therefore  justified 
in  dismissing  as  worthless  what  we  are  there  told.  Granting 
the  prologue  to  be  a  later  addition,  its  metre  and  style  show 
it  to  belong  to  the  best  period  of  old  English  versification. 
It  tells  us  things  about  the  Traveller  which  could  not  have 
been  gathered  merely  from  the  extant  poem  as  we  have  it. 
It  seems  reasonable  to  conclude  that,  even  if  the  Prologue  is 
a  later  accretion,  its  author  was  using  traditions  of  which  we 
now  have  no  other  record4. 

The  lines  on  ^Elfwine  form  a  problem  which  has  met  us 
more  than  once.  In  date  there  is  a  considerable  period  between 
Alboin  and  the  other  heroes  of  the  poem6,  but,  as  pointed  out 
above6,  we  cannot  put  these  lines  aside  on  this  score  alone.  If 
a  more  minute  examination  of  grammar  and  metre  shows  this 
passage  to  have  peculiarities  which  are  also  common  to  the 
other  suspected  lines,  but  which  are  not  shared  by  the  un 
suspected  passages,  then  we  must  regard  it  also  as  interpolated. 

1  See  above,  p.  8. 

8  See  above,  p.  122.     These  lines  were  rejected  by  Moller. 
8  So  Moller,  etc. 
4  See  above,  pp.  28,  145. 

6  Miillenhoff  (Nordalb.  Stud,  i,  149)  suggested  that  this  passage  was  perhaps 
an  interpolation. 
•  p.  149. 


152  Widsith 

Otherwise   we   must  regard   it  as   original :    meantime   it   is 
doubtful. 

We  have  then: 

The  Catalogue  of  Kings :    17  11.  A 

With    lines    on    Offa,    Hrothgar,    Hrothwulf    and  I  ^  ,. 
Ingeld:   15  11. 


Widsith  proper :    65  11. 

Possible  later  interpolations :   46  11. 

These  results  as  to  date  and  interpolations  are,  of  course, 
provisional,  and  must  be  checked  by  any  other  information 
which  we  can  procure. 

In  the  first  place  we  may  be  able  to  control  them  by  a 
systematic  survey  of  the  geography  of  the  poem.  This  will 
involve  a  certain  amount  of  repetition,  as  we  have  already  had 
to  consider  geographical  points  necessarily  involved  in  the 
study  of  heroic  legend.  But  it  is  worth  while  to  see  what 
results  we  can  draw  from  a  comparison  of  all  the  geographical 
data  of  Widsith. 

Secondly,  we  may  be  able  to  check  these  results  by  a  study 
of  the  grammar,  dialect  and  metre.  Here  especially  we  may 
hope  for  some  additional  light,  for  in  these  matters  more 
progress  has  been  made  since  the  days  of  Mulleuhoff  than  in 
the  investigation  of  the  ancient  geography  of  the  coast  tribes. 


CHAPTER  V. 

THE  GEOGRAPHY  OF    WIDSITH. 

HOWEVER  wide  his  wanderings,  no  poet  could  know  equally 
well  the  national  sagas  of  all  the  Germanic  tribes,  and  we  shall 
find  that  the  stories  known  to  Widsith  are  those  belonging 
particularly  to  two  of  the  five  great  divisions  of  the  Germanic 
race,  as  it  existed  in  the  early  centuries  of  our  era. 

But  in  any  attempt  to  classify,  into  their  groups  and  sub 
groups,  the  tribes  and  heroes  of  Widsith,  we  are  met  at  the 
outset  by  the  difficulty  of  an  unsettled  terminology.  The 
result  is  that  this  chapter  cannot  be  written  as  simply  as 
might  have  been  wished. 

Linguistic  Classifications. 

In  trying  to  realize  these  ethnographical  divisions  of  ancient 
Germany,  scholars  have  had  to  rely  chiefly  upon  linguistic 
evidence,  and  this  evidence  only  gives  up  its  secrets  very 
gradually.  More  and  more  accurate  results  are  obtained,  but 
even  the  final  result  is  only  an  approximation  to  the  truth. 

Hence  the  old  classification — Scandinavian,  Low  German, 
High  German — has  been  superseded  by  that  of  Scandinavian 
or  North  Germanic,  West  Germanic  (embracing  both  Low  and 
High  German)  and  East  Germanic  (embracing  Gothic  and  the 
other  kindred  tongues). 

Yet  even  this  perhaps  does  not  represent  ultimate  truth. 
The  so-called  "  Northern  "  and  "  Eastern  "  families  are  possibly 
more  intimately  interrelated.  Even  if  the  purely  linguistic 
evidence  is  not  strong  enough  to  establish  this  connection — 
and  many  scholars  have  held  that  it  is — there  remains  the 


154  Widsith 

significant  fact  that  the  same  tribal  names,  Rugian  and 
Vandal,  East  Goth  and  West  Goth,  occur  in  both  the 
Northern  and  the  Eastern  family,  but  not  in  the  West.  One 
of  the  minor  difficulties  of  Widsith  is  to  decide  when  the 
reference  is  to  the  "  Northern "  and  when  to  the  "  Eastern " 
people  of  the  same  name. 

Nor  must  we  forget  that  the  apparent  homogeneity  of  the 
West  Germanic  group  may  be  deceptive.  It  has  been  argued 
that  the  West  Germanic  peculiarities  are  a  development  of  the 
early  centuries  of  the  Christian  era.  Barred  by  the  Roman 
legions  from  spreading,  as  their  fellows  in  Northern  and  Eastern 
Germany  might  do,  a  number  of  distinct  German  tribes  were 
pressed  together  between  the  Elbe  and  the  Rhine.  During 
these  years,  it  is  urged,  peculiarities  were  developed  which 
have  overlaid  and  concealed  earlier  dialectal  differences.  We 
group  these  tribes  together  as  West  Germanic,  but  it  may  well 
be  that  the  difference  between  the  so-called  Anglo-Frisian  stock 
of  the  North-Sea  coast  and  the  inland  tribes  is  ancient  and 
deep-lying1. 

In  dealing  with  Widsith  it  is  of  particular  importance  to 
keep  in  mind  this  distinction  between  the  "Anglo-Frisian" 
tribes  of  the  coast,  and  the  inland  Deutsch,  or  Germans  proper. 

But,  owing  to  peculiarities  developed  in  the  High  German 
dialects  of  the  South,  this  Deutsch  or  German  speech  was  itself 
soon  cloven  into  two  great  sections,  the  so-called  High  and 
Low  German.  Now  English  students  have  generally,  in  prac 
tice,  applied  the  term  "Low  German"  to  all  those  West 
Germanic  dialects  which  did  not  undergo  the  High  German 
sound  changes :  whilst  the  Germans  have  kept  in  mind  that, 
obvious  and  striking  as  are  the  distinctions  which  differentiate 
the  High  German  from  the  other  West  Germanic  dialects,  yet 
those  more  obscure  differences  which  separate  the  Anglo-Frisian 
from  the  German  proper  are  more  ancient  and  fundamental. 
"  Low  German "  therefore,  in  the  terminology  of  English 
scholars,  generally  includes  English  and  Frisian,  whilst  Nieder- 
deutsch  in  the  terminology  of  German  scholars  excludes  them. 

1  See  Bremer  in  Pauls  Ordr.  ^  HI,  809  ;  Bremer  in  I.F.,  iv,  8-31 ;  Siebs  in 
Pauls  Grdr.M  i,  1154. 


The  Geography  of  Widsith  155 

I  propose  to  use  "  Low  German  "  as  excluding  the  Anglo-Frisian 
dialects.  For  to  do  otherwise  is  to  overlook  the  early  difference 
between  the  coast  tribes  and  the  Germans  of  the  inland  plains ; 
a  difference  which  is  demonstrable  philological  ly,  and  which  is 
important  to  the  student  of  the  geography  and  heroic  tradition 
of  Widsith. 

We  have  then  East  Germanic,  North  Germanic,  and  three 
divisions  of  West  Germanic :  Anglo-Frisian,  Low  German  and 
High  German. 

The  Roman  classification,  and  its  relation  to  the  linguistic 

divisions. 

To  harmonize  the  linguistic  classification  with  that  of  the 
Roman  writers  is  not  easy.  Tacitus'  famous  threefold  division 
of  the  Germans  cannot  be  reconciled  with  modern  philological 
classifications  unless  we  suppose  that,  knowing  little  of  either 
the  North  or  the  East,  he  left  these  regions  out  of  his  con 
sideration,  and  intended  his1  classification  of  the  Germans  into 
Ingaevones,  Herminones  and  Istaevones  to  point  only  to  the 
three  great  sections  of  the  Western  folk.  On  this  theory  the 
Ingaevones2  [Ingyaeones3]  who  dwell  proximi  Oceano  are  what 
philologists  call  the  "Anglo-Frisians":  the  North-Sea  folk. 
The  Istaevones2  [Istraeones3]  are  defined  by  Pliny  as  proximi 
Rheno,  they  are  therefore  the  predecessors  of  the  group  of 
peoples  later  known  as  the  Franks.  The  Herminones2 
[Hermioues3]  stretch  further  inland :  they  are  medii2  or 
mediterranei3,  and  so  coincide  with  that  great  stock  which 
subsequently,  spreading  further  south,  became  the  High 
German  people.  That  Tacitus  should  have  left  the  Eastern 
and  Northern  tribes  out  of  account  seems  strange.  Pliny 
mentions  the  East  Germanic  group  by  name.  Owing  to  the 
prominent  part  which  the  Gothic  tribe  has  played  in  history, 
and  to  the  accident  that  their  language,  alone  of  the  East 
Germanic  tongues,  has  been  preserved,  we  think  of  the  Goths 

1  The  classification  was,  of  course,  derived  by  Tacitus  from  the  tribes  of  the 
lower  Rhine,  and  represents   their  point  of  view.     Cf.   Olrik  in  Folk-Lore, 
xix,  398. 

2  Germania,  n.  *  Pliny,  Nat.  Hist,  iv,  14  (28),  ed.  C.  Mayhoff. 


156  Widsith 

as  the  typical  East  Germanic  people1.  But  Pliny  applies  to 
the  Eastern  group  the  name  Vandili2:  a  name  which  subse 
quently  came  to  be  restricted  to  one  particular  tribe  of  the 
group,  the  conquerors  of  Africa3.  For  the  North  Germans  no 
satisfactory  collective  name  has  ever  been  found.  They  are  the 
dwellers  in  the  "  island  "  of  "  Scandia  "  or  "  Thule,"  and  classical 
writers  pass,  hastily  and  with  a  shudder,  to  more  congenial 
topics. 

This  classification  may  be  expressed  in  tabular  form.  Bu 
a  table  is  too  dogmatic:  it  compels  us  to  draw  hard  and  fast 
lines  between  groups  of  dialects  when  these  dialects,  in  point 
of  fact,  probably  shaded  imperceptibly  into  one  another.  When 
we  speak  of  Anglo- Frisian  we  must  not  imagine  one  homo 
geneous  speech  with  definite  boundaries,  but  a  number  of 
dialects  grouped  together  in  virtue  of  common  characteristics. 
And  these  dialects  had  also  other  connections :  the  Anglian 
speech  had  affinities  with  the  neighbouring  Scandinavian,  the 
Frisian  is  stated  to  have  had  similar  affinities  with  the  neigh 
bouring  Low  German4. 

1  Already  in  the  sixth  century  the  general  name  of  the  "  Gothic  races"  has 
come  to  be  applied  to  the  East  Germans:    ForBiKa  tdvij  iro\\a  (itv  Kal  a\\a 
irpbrephv  re  r/v  Ka.1  ravuv  ecrn,  ra  8£  di]  iravruv  fjityurTa  re  Kal  a^ioKoydn-ara.  TbrQoi 
T£  elffi  Kal  f$avdi\oi  Kal  OvuriyorOoi  Kal  T-/iTrai5es...<j><i)vri  re  atrois  &TTI  pia,  TorBtKi) 
\eyo/j.frri,  Kal  /xoi  5oKovt>  tt-  Ms  fj.ev  elvai  airavres  rb  ira\<ubv  ZQvovs.     Procopius, 
Bell.  Vand.  i,  2. 

2  Tacitus  refers  to  this  group-name  without  explaining  it. 

3  The  interpretation   of   Tacitus'  nomenclature   in  the  terms  of  modern 
philology  is,    of  course,   highly  conjectural.     But  it  has   the   advantage   of 
enabling  us  to  attach  a  meaning  to  Tacitus'   classification,  which  otherwise 
would  be  unintelligible  to  us,  and  it  is  convenient.     Hence  it  has  been  widely, 
and  sometimes  too  dogmatically,  accepted. 

On  the  other  hand,  a  recent  English  critic  is  perhaps  unduly  sceptical. 
"The  whole  scheme  indeed  seems  to  me  to  be  based  on  a  fundamental  error. 
The  sound-changes  which  differentiated  the  Scandinavian,  Anglo-Frisian,  and 
German  groups  of  languages  from  one  another  appear  to  have  operated  in  the 
fifth,  sixth,  and  seventh  centuries.  On  the  other  hand  the  ethnic  groups  called 
Istaeuones,  Inguaeones  and  Heriniones,  seem  to  have  been  obscure  and  probably 
antiquated  in  the  first  century."  (Chadwick,  223.)  Now  this  criticism  would 
be  quite  just  if  levelled  against  any  attempt  to  equate  the  classification  of 
Tacitus  with  that  of  the  philologists  of  half  a  century  ago.  Their  classification 
often  did  rest  upon  changes  of  the  fifth,  sixth  and  seventh  centuries.  But  the 
classification  now  in  use  is  founded  upon  those  much  older  linguistic  differences 
which  have  only  gradually  been  revealed,  because  they  were  overlaid  and  con 
cealed  by  the  drastic  sound-changes  of  the  later  centuries.  It  may  well  be  that 
some  of  these  older  linguistic  differences  go  back  to  the  time  to  which  the 
classification  of  Tacitus  refers.  See  Bremer  in  I.F. ,  iv,  8-31. 

4  See  Morsbach,  Beiblatt  to  Anglia,  vn,  323-332 ;   Siebs  in  Pauh  Grdr.^  i, 
1154-7  ;  Bremer  in  I.F.  iv,  8,  etc. 


The  Geography  of  Widsith 


157 


With  this  caution  we  may  classify  the  Germanic  dialects 
thus  : 

I.  EAST  GERMANIC.     Latin  and  Greek  writers  use  Gothic  or  Vandalic 
to  cover  the  whole  of  this  group. 

II.  NORTH  GERMANIC  or  SCANDINAVIAN. 


A.     ANGLO-FRISIAN  (perhaps  corre 

sponding  to  an  earlier  Ingaevonian 

These  two  classes 

group  of  tribes). 

being    free    from 

III.    WEST 
GERMANIC.  ' 

B.    DEUTSCH 

f  Low  GERMAN  proper 
(NiederdeutscK),   per 
haps     corresponding 
to  earlier  Istaevonian 

the  High  German 
•  peculiarities    are 
often  inaccurately 
grouped  together 
as  "  Low  German.'' 

or  GERMAN 

(Prankish)  group.        ' 

in  narrower 

sense. 

HIGH  GERMAN  (Hoch- 

* 

deutsck),  perhaps  cor 

responding  to  earlier 

k.  Herminonian  group.     ., 

Later  Movements. 

The  terms  '  East '  and  '  West '  have  reference,  of  course,  to 
the  original  positions  of  these  groups.  By  the  sixth  century 
the  Eastern  people  had  migrated,  and  were  South  and  West  of 
the  Western  people.  One  of  the  extraordinary  things  about 
Widsith  is  that  its  author's  geographical  lore  seems  often  to 
date  back  to  a  period  before  these  migrations. 

The  East  Germans — Goths,  Gepidae,  Burgundians  and 
Vandals — battered  down  the  Roman  Empire  and  divided  the 
fragments  among  themselves ;  but  they  perished  in  the  process, 
and  their  widely  scattered  tribes  were  soon  absorbed  in  the 
Romanized  populations  among  whom  they  settled ;  they  were 
defeated  piecemeal  by  later  conquerors,  and  have  left  no  modern 
representatives.  A  Gothic  remnant  maintained  themselves 
throughout  the  Middle  Ages  on  the  mountainous  southern 
coast  of  the  Crimea — a  little  nation  of  a  few  thousand  souls, 
subject  to  a  Tartar  prince.  At  the  end  of  the  sixteenth  century 
they  disappear  from  history1,  and  with  them  the  East  Germanic 
races  end.  The  North  Germans,  on  the  other  hand,  in  spite  of 
their  plundering  viking  raids  at  a  later  period,  have  mostly 

1  Gislenii   Busbeqaii,  Epistola,  Parisiis,  1589,  pp.   135-7.      Cf.   Life  and 
Letters  of  Ghiselin  de  Busbecq  by  Forster  and  Daniell,  1881,  pp.  355-9. 


158  Widsith 

remained  in  Gothland,  Sweden  and  Norway — their  ancient 
seats.  Of  the  West  Germans,  the  sea  tribes,  who  once  held 
the  coast  from  the  Zuider  Zee  to  the  Baltic,  have  paid  the 
penalty  of  their  piracy.  Angles  and  Jutes  conquered  Britain, 
and  Danes  occupied  their  ancient  continental  homes.  The 
Lombards — if  indeed  they  are  to  be  classed  with  this  group — 
left  the  lower  Elbe,  and  were  lost  amid  the  Italians,  while  the 
Saxons,  besides  helping  in  the  settlement  of  England,  first 
conquered  and  then  absorbed  various  inland  tribes  dwelling 
in  the  modern  Hanover  and  Westphalia.  The  continental  or 
"  Old "  Saxons  therefore  ceased  to  be  purely  Anglo-Frisian  in 
blood  or  speech,  and  have  rather  to  be  counted  as  "Low 
German."  So  that  the  "Anglo-Frisian"  speech  is  now  repre 
sented  only  by  a  few  hundred  thousand  Frisian-speaking  folk 
in  the  north  of  Holland  and  in  the  islands  of  the  North  Sea, 
and  by  English-speaking  people  in  other  parts  of  the  world. 
The  Istaevones,  if  we  equate  them  with  the  Franks,  became 
the  ancestors  of  the  Dutch,  of  the  Flemings  and  of  the 
Germans  of  the  Lower  Rhine  :  these  "  Low  Frankish  "  together 
with  the  "  Low  Saxon  "  dialects  constitute  the  "  Low  German  " 
proper.  The  Herminones  of  Roman  times  included  the  Her- 
munduri,  Marcomanni  and  Suevi :  great  nations  which,  with 
some  changes  both  of  boundaries  and  name,  are  represented  by 
High  German  peoples — Thuringians,  Bavarians,  Swabians. 

But  though  it  may  be  possible  to  trace  some  measure  of 
continuity  in  the  different  classifications  of  the  Germanic 
people  from  the  days  of  Tacitus  onwards,  it  is  better  not  to 
follow  certain  German  scholars  in  speaking  of  an  Ingaevonian 
dialect  when  we  mean  Anglo-Frisian.  That  the  two  terms 
corresponded  is,  after  all,  but  a  theory;  that  they  corresponded 
exactly  is  unlikely. 

Although  the  many  peculiarities  common  to  Old  English 
and  Frisian  point  to  intimate  intercourse  between  Angles  and 
Frisians  in  the  early  centuries  of  our  era,  this  does  not  in  the 
least  preclude  intercourse,  on  the  other  side,  between  Angles 
and  Danes.  This  communication  has  left  its  mark  in  certain 
phonetic  peculiarities  which  Anglian  possesses  in  common  with 
the  Scandinavian  tongues.  Anglian  bards,  we  have  seen,  were 


The  Geography  of  Widsith  159 

interested  in  the  fight  at  the  Danish  Heorot,  as  well  as  in  the 
fight  at  the  Frisian  Finnesburg.  The  Baltic,  like  the  North 
Sea,  would  unite  rather  than  separate  seafaring  nations. 

It  is  quite  likely,  then,  that  the  Ingaevonians  may  have 
included  not  only  "  Anglo- Frisian "  but  also  Scandinavian 
tribes1 :  and,  however  this  may  be,  the  intercommunication 
between  the  most  northern  of  the  Anglo-Frisians  and  the  most 
southern  of  the  Scandinavians  is  obvious.  Evidence  of  it  meets 
us  everywhere  in  Widsith. 

The  Traveller  and  his  people — The  Myrgings. 

More  than  once  in  our  poem  mention  is  made  of  the 
Myrgings,  a  tribe  to  which,  it  would  seem,  Widsith  himself 
belongs.  Unfortunately  the  text  is  not  clear.  Hine  from 
Myrgingum  celpele  onwocon  cannot  be  construed  ;  but,  what 
ever  be  the  correct  reading,  some  connection  between  the  scdp 
and  the  Myrgings  is  indicated.  In  a  latter  passage,  too,  Widsith 
speaks  of  the  prince  of  the  Myrgings,  Eadgils,  as  his  liege-lord. 

Who  these  Myrgings  were  it  is  not  easy  to  say.  We 
should  gather  that,  on  the  north,  their  boundaries  touched 
those  of  the  Angles,  for  a  frontier  dispute  was  settled  by  Offa 
with  the  sword  at  Fifeldor — i.e.  the  river  Eider,  which  is  still 
the  boundary  between  Schleswig  and  Holstein2.  Again  the 
word  Swcefe  seems  to  be  used  as  synonymous  with  Myrgingas. 
We  should  conclude  then,  from  the  poem,  that  the  Myrgings 
dwelt  south  of  the  Eider,  and  that  they  were  members  of  the 
wide-spread  Suevic  stock. 

From  other  sources  little  help  is  to  be  got.  A  Mauringa  is 
mentioned  by  Paul  the  Deacon3  as  having  been  visited  by  the 
Lombards  early  in  their  travels,  whilst  the  "  Geographer  of 
Ravenna4,"  who  is  supposed  to  follow  an  original  composed 

1  For  the  evidence  see  Schiitte,  A.f.d.A.  xxvm,  9-10;    Kossinna  in  I.F. 
vii,  308-11;   Chadwick,  209,  etc.,  295-6. 

2  See  note  to  1.  43. 

8  Igitur  Langobardi  tandem  in  Mauringam  pervenientes...egressi  itaque 
Langobardi  de  Mauringa  applicuerunt  in  Golanda.  Paulus  i,  13  in  Script.  Rer. 
Lang.  ed.  Waitz,  in  M.G.H.,  1878. 

4  Ravennatis  anonymi  cosmographia,  ed.  Finder  andParthey,  Berolini,  1860, 
pp.  27,  28  (§  i,  11). 


160  Widsith 

in  the  sixth  century,  twice  mentions  Maurungani:  gani  is, 
I  suppose,  miswritten  for  gaui  (cf.  Goth,  gawi,  "  country "). 

The  attempt  of  MiillenhofF1  to  make  the  Myrging  name 
coincide  linguistically  with  Mauringa,  Maurungani  was  hardly 
successful:  we  should  expect  an  O.E.  form  Miering,  not 
Mierging.  In  the  most  elaborate  recent  study  of  early  German 
geography  the  identification  has  therefore  been  abandoned 
altogether2,  whilst  those  who  have  adhered  to  it  have  had  to 
admit  that  the  names  do  not  linguistically  quite  correspond, 
and  that  corruption  of  some  kind  has  crept  in3. 

It  is  perhaps  permissible  to  point  out  that  g,  especially  in 
the  neighbourhood  of  a  u,  is  a  difficult  sound  to  be  certain 
about,  and  that  a  somewhat  similar  intrusive  g,  which  at  one 
time  seemed  as  inexplicable  as  the  g  of  Myrging,  has  since 
been  shown  to  be  in  accordance  with  phonetic  laws4.  But  let 
it  be  granted  that  the  g  of  Myrging  is  "  uuphonetic."  It  does 
not  therefore  follow  that  the  identification  of  the  two  words  is 
"impossible  on  philological  grounds5."  It  is  true  that  in 
dealing  with  the  native  words  of  a  language,  the  presumption 
is  that  such  words  will  only  change  in  accordance  with  phonetic 
law.  But  this  does  not  apply  to  legendary  and  foreign 
geographical  names  which,  as  they  pass  from  mouth  to  mouth, 
often  undergo  transformations  which  are  the  result,  not  of 
phonetic  law,  but  of  mere  error6.  Are  we  to  account  phonetically 
for  every  letter  in  such  a  change  as  Stafford  for  Oxford,  through 
an  intermediate  Asquesufforch,  in  Berners'  Froissart  ? 

1  Z.f.d.A.  xi,  279-80.     See  also  Moller  V.E.  28,  29  and  A.f.d.A.  xxn,  152. 
Holier  would  connect  the  Myrgings  with  the  'M.apovivyot  of  Ptolemy  [n,  11,  22] 
and  the  Marsigni  [for  *Marvigni]  of  Tacitus. 

2  Much  in  P.B.B.  xvn,  192-4.     Attempts  to  account  for  the  name  etymo- 
logically  will  be  found  there,  and  in  A.f.d.A.  xvi,  24  (by  Kossinna).     Cf.  Hirt 
in  P.B.B.  xxi,  148. 

3  Thus  Heinzel  suggests  that  the  g  may  be  due  to  a  popular  etymology  con 
necting  the  name  with  mirige  "merry";  see  Ostgotische  Heldensage,  in  W.S.B. 
cxix,  3,  p.  25,  1889. 

4  By  Sophus  Bugge  in  P.B.B.  xni,  504  "  Germanisch  ug  aus  uw."    The  g  or 
ug  seems  generally,  though  not  always,  to  have  developed  out  of  an  earlier 
uw.     Cf.  O.E.  geoguft:   Gothic  junda;    O.E.  sygel:   Goth,  sauil;    O.E.  nigon: 
O.H.G.  niwan;  O.E.  sugu:  O.E.  su.     See  A.  Noreen,  Abriss  der  urgermanischen 
Lautlehre,  Strassburg,  1894;    Kluge,  Vorgeschichte  der  altgerm.  Dialekte,  in 
Pauls  Grdr.w  i,  380;   Moller  in  A.f.d.A.  xxii,  152  (footnote). 

8  Lawrence  in  Mod.  Philol.  iv,  362,  following  Heinzel,  Ostgot.  Heldensage, 
25,  and  followed  by  Holthansen,  n,  166. 

6  See  Heusler  in  Z.f.d.A.  LII,  97,  etc.    Heldennamen  in  mehrfacher  Lautgestalt. 


The  Geography  of  Widsith  161 

It  does  not  appear  that  Paul  himself  was  certain  where 
Mauringa  was :  in  his  account  of  the  early  Lombard  wanderings 
he  blindly  followed  older  authorities,  and  was  obviously  puzzled 
by  the  names  of  tribes  and  places  which  he  reproduced1.  Of 
the  "  Geographer's "  two  references,  the  one  is  vague,  and  the 
other  corrupt2.  It  seems  clear,  however,  that  this  Maurungani 
is  a  district  bordering  on  the  Elbe,  and  apparently  extending 
indefinitely  in  an  eastward  direction  over  those  lands  which 
the  Germanic  tribes  had  vacated  when  they  broke  into  the 
Roman  Empire3.  Northward  it  borders  on  the  Danish  country 
(Dania).  It  therefore  includes  Holstein,  together  with  an 
uncertain  amount  of  what  is  now  Eastern  Germany.  Here 
too,  east  and  north  of  the  Elbe,  it  seems  best  to  place  Paul's 
Mauringa ;  and  certainly  it  is  here  that  we  must  place  the 
Myrgings,  south  of  the  Eider,  in  the  modern  Holstein. 

Both  phonetically  and  geographically  Myrging  sufficiently 
coincides  with  Maurungani  to  make  the  identification  highly 
probable.  But  it  would  not  be  safe  to  base  argument  upon  it. 

Geographical  classification  of  the  names  in  Widsith. 

An  attempt  to  classify  geographically  the  tribes,  localities 
and  heroes  mentioned  in  the  undoubted  portions  of  Widsith 
gives  this  result. 

EAST  GERMANIC. 

Tribes  and  Places :   [HKETH-]GOTAN,  BURGENDAS*,  GEFTHAS,  WISTLA- 
WUDU. 

Heroes :    JEormanric,  Becca,  Gfifica,  Guthhere*,  Herelingas,  (Emerca  and 

1  Most  of  the  names  come  from  the  Origo  gentis  Langobardorum :  Mauringa 
however  is  not  found  there. 

a  See  Appendix  B,  Maurungani  and  the  Geographer  of  Ravenna. 

8  Zeuss  (472)  and  Schmidt  (Zur  Geschichte  der  Langobarden,  1885,  p.  47) 
identify  Mauringa  with  [Maurungani]  which  they  place  east  of  the  Elbe. 
Bluhrne  (Die  Gens  Langobardorum  und  ihre  Herkunft,  Bonn,  1868,  p.  23) 
placed  Mauringa  to  the  west,  but  on  quite  insufficient  grounds.  Mullenhoff, 
who  so  read  the  poem  that  Eadgils,  prince  of  the  Myrgings,  was  the  husband 
of  Ealhhild,  made  the  Myrgings  extend  towards  the  old  Lombard  home  in 
Pannonia,  in  order  to  supply  a  motive  for  the  match :  which  would,  he  thought, 
have  been  unreasonable  had  the  Myrgings  not  extended  beyond  Holstein.  See 
Z.f.d.A.  xi,  279;  Beovulf,  99;  Nordalb.  Stud,  i,  140,  etc. 

4  Geographically,  the  Burgundians  are,  when  we  first  meet  them,  indis 
putably  East  Germanic.  Evidence  for  the  character  of  the  Old  Burgundian 
speech  is  scanty,  but  is  generally  considered  to  confirm  its  East  Germanic 

0.  11 


162  Widsith 

Fridla),  East-Gota,  Unwen,  Sifeca,   Hlithe,   Incgentheow,   Wynnhere, 
Rumstan,  Gislhere,  Freotheric,  Wudga,  Hama. 

%*  Probably  we  should  include  WULFINGAS  :  Helm ;  also  Theod- 
ric,  Seafola,  Heatkoric. 

The  following  are  spoken  of  as  Gothic  champions,  and  may 
therefore  be  classed  here,  though  we  have  no  information  outside 
our  poem  for  so  placing  them :  Hethca,  Secca,  Wulfhere,  Rcedhere, 
Rondhere,  Withergield. 

NORTH  GERMANIC. 

Tribes   and    Places :    DENE,   S.E-DENE,    SUTH-DENE,    SWEON,   GEATAS, 
WENLAS,  HEATHOREAMAS,  HEOEOT. 

Heroes :   Sigehere,  Alewih,  Hrothwulf,  Hrothgar,  Ongendtheow. 
*#*  Perhaps  we  should  include  THROWENDAS. 

ANGLO-FRISIAN. 

Tribes  and  Places  :   W^ERNAS,  EOWAN,  YTE,  FRESNA  CYNN  (FRYSAN), 
HOCINGAS,  SYCGAN,  ENGLE  (ONGEL),  SEAXE,  FIFELDOR. 

Heroes :  Billing,  Oswitie,  Gefundf,  Finn,  Folcwalda,  Hncef,  Sceferth^  Of  a, 
Beadeca. 

%*  Probably  we  should  include  WOINGAS,  WROSNAS  :  Wold, 
Holen. 

LOW  GERMAN. 
Tribes :  FRONCAN,  HETWARE. 
Heroes  :   Theodric,  Hun. 

%*  Probably  we  should  include  THYRINGAS  :  Wod. 

HIGH  GERMAN. 

Tribes:   ?  ^ENENAS,  ?  THYRINGAS.     (Both  very  unlikely.) 
Heroes:   ?  Wod.    (Very  unlikely.) 

The  following  tribes  and  heroes  cannot  be  classified  exactly, 
but  it  is  clear  that  they  are  all  maritime,  and  are  to  be  localized 
somewhere  on  or  near  the  Baltic : 
Tribes :  HOLMRYGE,  GLOMMAS,  H^ELSINGAS,  YMBRE,  LONGBEARDAN  (1.  32), 

WlCINGA   CYNN,    HEATHOBEARDAN. 

Heroes :   Hagena,  Heoden,  Wada,  Sceaf there,  Sceafa,  Ingeld. 

*#*  Near  the  Baltic  we  must  also  place  the  BRONDINGAS, 
HUNDINGAS,  MYRGINGAS,  SW^FE  :  Breoca,  Mearchealf,  Mearca, 
Witta,  Eadgils ;  perhaps  WULFINGAS  :  Helm ;  the  HEREFARAN  and 
Hringweald  on  either  the  North  Sea  or  the  Baltic. 

character.  Hempel  (Linguistic  and  Ethnografic  status  of  the  Burgundiant  : 
Trans.  Am.  Philol.  Assoc.  xxxix,  1909,  pp.  105-119)  argues  for  Anglo-Frisian 
and  Norse  affinities.  But  this  theory  rests  upon  the  interpretation  of  certain 
runic  inscriptions  the  reading  of  which  is  exceedingly  doubtful,  and  which  in 
any  case  cannot  be  proved  to  be  Burgundian. 


The  Geography  of  Widsith  163 

The  non-Germanic  people  mentioned  in  the  undoubted  parts 
of  Widsith  all  belong  to  the  Mark  : 
Tribes :  HDNAS,  CBEACAS,  FINNAS,  WINEDAS,  RUMWALAS. 
Heroes :  ^Etla,  Casere,  Gaelic. 

The  following  are  quite  uncertain  : 

Tribes :  BANINGAS,  RONDINGAS,  GEFFLEGAS,  SWEORDWERAS,  HRONAS, 
DEANAS,  FRUMTINGAS. 

Heroes :  Thyle,  Sdlling,  Ealhhild  daughter  of  Eadwine  (unless  the 
reference  to  ^Effmne  son  of  Eadwine  be  genuine,  in  which  case  it 
is  probable  that  Ealhhild  is  regarded  as  a  Lombard  princess,  sister 
of  ^Elfwine). 

The  following  names  occur  in  the  suspected  passages  only : 

Tribes  and  Places  :  "  EASTAN  OF  ONGLE,"  EATUL,  SERCINGAS,  SERINGAS, 
WALA  RICE,  SCOTTAS,  PEOHTAS,  SCRIDE-FINNAS,  LIDWICINGAS,  LEONAS, 
HiETHNAS,  H^lRETHAS,  ISRAHELAS,  EXSYRINGA8,  EBREAS,  INDEAS, 
EGTPTAS,  MOIDAS,  PERSAS,  MOFDINGAS,  ONGEND-MYRGINGAS  (?), 
WITH-MYRGINGAS  (?),  AMOTHINGAS,  EAST-THYRINGAS,  EOLAS,  ISTE, 
IDUMINGAS. 

Heroes :  Widsith,  Hwala,  Alexandreas,  JElfwine  son  of  Eadwine,  Elsa, 
jEgelmund,  Hungar. 

In  these  lists  we  notice  that 

(1)  a  wide  knowledge  is  shown  of  Gothic  story.     But  this 
is  legendary,  as  is  all  the  knowledge  our  poet  shows  of  East- 
Germanic  tribes :  it  sometimes  reflects  a  state  of  things  which  had 
passed  away  even  in  the  fourth  century.     Thus  the  localization 
in  the  Vistula-wood  of  the  struggle  between  Goth  and  Hun  is 
unhistoric ;  in  Ermanaric's  day  the  Goths  were  dwelling  on  the 
plains  near  the  Black  Sea,  and  it  was  on  these  plains,  between 
the  Sea  of  Azov  and  the  Danube,  that  the  struggle  took  place- 
The  term  Hrcedas,  applied  to  the  Goths,  is  apparently  legendary, 
not  historic1.    The  grouping  of  Burgundians  and  Goths  together 
is  legendary  geography2. 

(2)  Of  the  North  Germanic  tribes  there  is  most  knowledge 
of  those  bordering  on  the  Baltic,  and  especially  of  the  Danes. 

(3)  Full  information  is  shown  of  the  Anglo-Frisian  tribes 
and  heroes,  and  also 

1  See  Appendix  H. 

2  See  note  to  1.  19.     Schiitte  (Oldsagn,  46)  finds  a  similar  archaism  in  the 
grouping  of  Gepidae   and   Wends,   which  he   thinks  points  to  "  Gepidernes 
gamle  Bopaale  ved  0sterstfen."    But  this  is  not  conclusive  :    for  the  Wends 
moved  southward  also,  and  still  bordered  on  the  Gepidae  after  these  latter 
had  settled  in  Dacia.    It  is  clear  from  Jordanes,  v  (33,  34),  that  the  two  tribes 
were  still  immediate  neighbours  ia  the  sixth  century. 

11—2 


164  Widsith 

(4)  of  a  large  number  of  tribes  which  we  cannot  place 
exactly,  but  which  clearly  dwelt  upon  the  coast,  in  some  cases 
perhaps  of  the  North  Sea,  but  more  generally  of  the  Baltic. 

(5)  Of   Low    German   tribes   and   heroes   there   is    little 
cognizance.     Of  the  many  Frankish  heroes  Theodoric  (the  son 
of  Clovis)  alone  is  mentioned :  and  we  happen  to  know  that 
Theodoric's   victories   were   famed   not   only   among   his   own 
people,   but   also    among    the   coast-tribes.      The   other   Low 
German    peoples   mentioned,  the  Hetware,  and  probably  the 
Thyringas,  were  immediate  neighbours  of  these  coast  tribes. 

(6)  Of  High  German  tribes  and  heroes  there  seems  to  be 
no  knowledge  whatever.     For  the  identification  of  the  ^Enenas 
with  a  Bavarian  family  is  more  than  doubtful,  and  the  Thyringas 
are  apparently  the  Low  German  Thoringi.     The  absence  of  any 
mention  of  such  mighty  nations  as  the  Bavarians  and  Alamanni 
is  remarkable.    The  word  Swcefe  occurs  three  times,  but  in  each 
case  the  tribe  referred  to  is  grouped  with  peoples  dwelling  on 
the  Baltic,  and  it  seems  that  the  North  Suavi,  not  the  great 
Southern  people,  are  meant. 

(7)  Out  of  thirty-one   tribes   and   places  which  we   can 
identify  all  but  two  are  connected  with  either  the  North  Sea 
or  the  Baltic :  and  these  two  exceptions  are  not  far  remote. 

The  deductions  seem  obvious.  The  geography  is  not  that 
of  a  traveller  going  from  Angel  to  the  Black  Sea  in  the  days 
of  Ermanaric.  Neither  is  it  that  of  one  going  from  Angel  to 
Italy  in  the  days  of  Alboin.  Such  a  traveller  must  have 
passed  through  the  lands  of  the  Alamanni  and  Bavarians : 
Swcefe  would  have  meant  to  him  not  the  Baltic  folk  but  the 
mighty  Southern  tribe :  he  must  have  met  with  the  Heruli, 
Sciri,  Turcilingi,  Slavs,  Avars,  not  one  of  which  tribes  is 
mentioned.  Of  the  races  specially  recorded  by  Paul  as  having 
accompanied  Alboin's  Lombards  into  Italy — the  Gepidae,  Bul 
garians,  Sarmatians,  Pannonians,  Suavi  and  Noricans — two  only 
are  known  to  Widsith. 

Further,  the  names  occurring  in  the  unsuspected  portions 
of  Widsith  are  systematic :  they  are  not  the  casual  accretion 
of  successive  interpolators.  The  only  non-Germanic  names  are 


The  Geography  of  Widsith  165 

those  of  the  border-peoples,  which  must  have  been  known  to 
the  most  stay-at-home  German.  And  even  of  Germanic  tribes 
those  only  are  mentioned  which  might  have  come  within  the 
view  of  one  whose  outlook  was  confined  to  the  North  Sea  and 
the  Baltic — a  tribesman  situated  be  seem  tweonum. 

We  have  such  a  survey  of  Germanic  geography  and  legend 
as  might  have  been  made  by  a  gleeman  who  drew  his  lore  from 
the  traditions  of  the  ancient  Angel.  From  this  point  of  view 
everything  drops  into  its  right  place :  the  knowledge  shown 
of  the  Anglo- Frisian  tribes  and  of  their  legends,  of  their 
immediate  neighbours,  and  the  more  or  less  complete  ignorance 
of  everything  else,  with  the  one  exception  of  Gothic  saga, 
become  at  once  intelligible. 

I  do  not  mean  that  the  geography  of  the  poem  shows  that 
it  was  made  before  the  Angles  came  to  England :  but  that  it 
was  made  not  long  after,  whilst  the  traditions  of  the  continental 
home  were  still  fresh.  How  different  the  English  outlook 
ultimately  became  is  shown  in  the  geography  of  Germany  added 
by  Alfred  to  the  Orosius1. 

When  we  turn  to  the  suspected  passages  we  find  a  casual 
collection  of  names,  most  of  them  non-Germanic.  Many  of 
these  names,  ^Elfwine,  ^Egelmund,  Hwala,  may  represent 
genuine  tradition:  but  taking  them  in  the  mass,  they  are 
a  jumble  such  as  might  have  been  made  by  some  half-learned 
and  quite  stupid  person2.  The  phrase  eastern  of  Ongle  seems 
definitely  to  point  to  an  English  origin3. 

An  examination  of  the  geography  of  Widsith  confirms  us, 
then,  in  the  belief  that  Widsith  cannot  have  any  autobio 
graphical  basis,  but  that  it  represents  an  exceedingly  early 
form  of  traditional  lore,  and  that  certain  portions,  which  can  be 
defined  with  some  accuracy,  are  likely  to  be  later  interpolations. 
The  ease  with  which  the  passages  containing  the  suspected 
names  can  be  disentangled,  leaving  nothing  which  does  not 
bear  the  stamp  of  great  age,  is  remarkable. 

1  See  Appendix  L. 

2  Brandl  supposes  them  the  work  of  a  cleric  who  had  read  Alfred's  Orosius 
(Pauls  Grdr.  11,  1,  966-7.     See  Appendix  L). 

3  See  note  to  1.  8. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

LANGUAGE  AND  METRE  OF   WIDSITH. 

Dialect. 

Widsith,  like  almost  all  Old  English  poetry,  is  written  in 
the  normal  Late  West  Saxon  literary  speech.  But  certain 
words,  chiefly  proper  names,  show  that  the  poem  has  been 
transliterated  from  a  non-W.S.  dialect.  Such  are  Breoca,  Eatul, 
Earmanric,  HeaSo-,  Seafola,  Wald,  freffSu-,  geofum,  meodu-, 
sccecefi,  sprecan1.  Some  of  these  forms,  like  Wald,  though 
commoner  in  Anglian,  are  not  unknown  in  W.S. :  but  most 
are  quite  impossible  in  a  pure  W.S.  dialect.  Equally  significant 
is  the  odd  form  Creacum,  where  we  should  expect  Crecum. 
For,  if  the  scribe  had  been  transliterating  from  an  Anglian 
original,  he  would  have  often  had  to  change  Angl.  e  to  W.S.  ea : 
and  he  might  easily  have  done  this  once  too  often,  and  have 
wrongly  written  Creacum  for  Crecum,  just  as  he  would  rightly 
have  written  eac  for  ec*. 

The  dialect  points,  then,  to  a  non-W.S.,  and  probably 
Anglian,  origin  for  our  poem :  and  this  confirms  what  we 
should  expect  from  the  place  allotted  to  Offa,  the  greatest 
of  all  Anglian  heroes. 

The  language  has  been  too  much  altered  for  it  to  give 
much  indication  of  date,  except  where  a  change  involves 
a  difference  in  the  number  of  syllables :  in  which  cases  the 

1  Headen    and    wiolena   rest    upon   conjectural    emendation,    and    should 
therefore  hardly  be  counted :    it   is   also   conjecture   that  Eowan  stands  for 
Eawan.     Brandl  quotes  Deanum  as  non-W.S. :  but  we  cannot  be  certain  what 
the  original  form  of  this  word  was. 

2  Pointed  out  by  Holthausen,  n,  165. 


Lcmguage  and  Metre  of  Widsith  167 

metre  sometimes   preserves  the  earlier  form,  or   more   often 
betrays  what  the  earlier  form  must  have  been. 


Syntactical  Usages. 

Attempts  to  determine  the  date  of  O.E.  poems  by  observing 
the  usage  of  the  demonstrative,  se,  seo,  ]>cet,  and  of  the  weak 
adjective,  were  made  by  Lichtenheld  in  18721.  Lichtenheld 
examined  the  usage  of  Beowulf,  Genesis,  Andreas,  Maldon  and 
the  poems  in  the  Anglo-Saxon  Chronicle.  He  showed  that, 
taking  Beowulf  as  a  specimen  of  the  earliest  O.E.  poetry, 
Genesis  and  Andreas  as  intermediate,  Maldon  and  the  Chronicle- 
poems  as  late,  there  is  a  progressive  alteration  in  usage : 

(1)  se,  seo,  }>cet  becomes  more  and  more  common2.     This  is 
largely  due  to  the  fact  that : 

(2)  in  the  older  poems  the  weak  adjective  +  noun  occurs 
frequently  where  we  should  now  use  the  definite  article :  wisa 
fengel,  "  the  wise  prince " ;  whilst  se  wisa  fengel  is  used  only 
when  a  demonstrative  is  needed,  "  that  wise  prince." 

(3)  Later,  however,  se,  seo,  \cet  comes  to  be  used  in  the 
common  and  vague  sense  in  which  the  definite  article  is  used 
in  Modern  English,  so  that  we  get  with  increasing  frequency 
the  usage,  definite  article  +  weak  adjective  +  noun3;  whilst  the 
usage,  weak  adjective  +  noun,  decreases4. 

(4)  The  use  of  the  instrumental,  and  particularly  of  the 
instrumental  of  the  weak  adjective  +  noun,  becomes  more  and 
more  rare5. 

Lichtenheld  also  investigated  (5)  the  use  of  the  weak 
adjective  without  noun  (se  wisa  "the  wise  one").  His  figures 
here6  showed  no  very  marked  tendency  either  to  an  increased 
or  decreased  use.  These  cases  need  careful  examination  and 
discrimination,  which,  so  far  as  space  allowed,  was  given  to 
them  by  Lichtenheld7. 

Lichtenheld's  tests  have  since  been  applied  to  all  the 
longer  O.E.  poems  by  A.  J.  Barnouw8. 

1  Z.f.d.A.  xvi,  325,  etc. 

2  P.  332.  •  Pp.  335,  357-69.  4  Pp.  334,  375. 
0  Pp.  326-7.                      6  P.  331.  i  P.  352. 

8  Textkritische  Untersuchungen,  1902. 


168  Widsith 

That  the  use  of  the  article  becomes  commoner  as  time  goes 
on  in  O.E.  poetry  is  indisputable  :  how  far  we  are  justified  in 
using  the  statistics  of  Lichtenheld  and  Barnouw  as  criteria  of 
exact  date  is  more  open  to  dispute1. 

Now  Brandl2  notes  in  Widsith  three  examples  of  the  use 
of  the  weak  adjective  +  noun  (without  the  definite  article). 
Against  this  he  alleges  three  instances  of  the  use  of  the  definite 
article  +  weak  adjective  +  noun,  and  accordingly  pronounces,  so 
far  as  judgement  is  possible  on  such  limited  figures,  for  the 
eighth  century,  and  the  period  before  Cynewulf. 

But,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  only  one  of  the  three  alleged 
instances  of  the  late  usage,  def.  art.  +  weak  adj.  4-  noun,  is 
correct.  The  other  two  are  examples  not  of  the  def.  art.  +  weak 
adj.  +  noun  but  of  the  def.  art.  +  weak  adj.,  a  usage  which  needs 
scrutiny  and  which,  on  the  whole,  may  be  an  indication  rather  of 
early  than  of  late  date3.  These  two  examples  are  gestya  \>a  selestan 
(1.  110),  gesi\a  }>a  scemestan  (1.  125).  Now  here  the  article  is 
fully  justified,  according  to  the  oldest  usage,  and  according  to 
what  appears  to  have  been  the  original  force  of  se,  and  of  the  weak 
adjective.  Both  Lichtenheld  (p.  343)  and  Barnouw  (pp.  42-43) 
speak  expressly  with  regard  to  this  use  of  the  article  with  the 
superlative.  Widsith  here  conforms  to  the  usage  of  Beowulf, 
where,  as  Barnouw  points  out,  selest  is  employed  for  inanimate 
things,  se  selesta  for  persons :  husa  selest,  but  magcfyegna  Ipone 
selestan.  We  certainly  cannot  regard  it  as  in  any  sense  a  late 
usage.  We  have  here,  then,  in  Widsith,  not  three  examples  of 
early  against  three  of  late  usage,  but  three  of  early  against  one 
of  late  usage. 

Widsith  is  too  brief  a  poem  to  afford  a  satisfactory  basis  for 
argument  from  statistics;  on  the  other  hand,  its  brevity  will 
permit  of  our  applying  all  Lichtenheld's  tests,  and  considering 
all  the  circumstances  under  which  the  article  is  or  is  not  used. 
Such  full  examination  is  necessary,  if  we  are  to  use  the  tests 
with  any  degree  of  safety8. 

1  See  Sarrazin  in  Engl.  Stud,  xxxvm,  145  etc. 

2  Pauls  Grdr.(2)  n,  1,  968. 

3  Foster,  Judith,  1892,  p.  54  (Q.u.F.  LXXI). 


Language  and  Metre  of  Widsith  169 

I.  Use  of  se,  seo,  \>cet. 

Se,  seo,  }>cet  is  used  six  times  in  Widsith  (11.  36,  110,  118, 
125,  127,  131):  four  times  in  undoubted,  twice  in  suspected 
passages.  This  is  a  very  small  percentage.  We  must  of  course 
allow  for  the  fact  that  47  lines  are  filled  only  with  lists  of 
names,  and  that  in  them  we  should  hardly  expect  to  find  either 
articles  or  adjectives.  These  lines  should,  no  doubt,  be  dis 
missed  from  the  reckoning;  but  we  are  still  left  with  six 
instances  in  96  lines,  or  one  in  every  16.  The  article  is 
found  in  Beowulf  once  in  every  11  lines,  more  frequently  in 
Genesis,  once  in  seven  lines  in  the  Andreas,  about  as  often  in 
the  Chronicle  poems,  once  in  four  lines  in  Maldon1.  So  far, 
then,  as  restraint  in  its  use  is  a  test  of  antiquity,  Widsith  is 
more  archaic  than  Beowulf,  as  Beowulf  is  more  archaic  than 
Andreas  and  Andreas  than  Maldon. 

When  we  examine  the  individual  instances  we  find  that  in 
five  cases  out  of  six  the  use  of  se,  seo,  ]>cet  is  justifiable :  with 
superlatives,  ]>a  selestan,  ]>a  scemestan  ;  with  distinct  demonstra 
tive  effect,  of  }>am  heape  "  from  that  company  of  which  I  was 
speaking,"  ]>ara  monna  modgast  "bravest  of  those  men  just 
mentioned,"  on  ]>cere  feringe  "  in  my  travels  of  which  I  have 
been  telling."  Only  in  one  instance  )?a  wloncan  gedriht  "  the 
proud  company  "  have  we  the  late,  rather  meaningless  use  of  se 
as  the  definite  article.  And  this  instance  occurs  in  a  passage 
which  we  have  already  concluded,  on  grounds  quite  other  than 
those  of  grammar,  to  be  probably  a  late  interpolation. 

II.  Weak  Adjective  +  Noun. 

Of  this  early  usage  we  get  one  instance  in  the  suspected 
lines  (forman  stye),  two  in  the  undoubted  passages  (wundnan 
golde,  sciran  reorde).  Excluding,  as  before,  lines  containing 
proper  names  only,  we  have  three  examples  in  96  lines,  or,  if  we 
prefer  to  take  the  undoubted  passages  only,  two  in  64:  as  it 
happens,  precisely  the  same  proportion :  a  proportion  greater 
than  the  80  instances  in  Beowulf,  and  much  greater  than  the  25  in 
Genesis,  seven  in  Andreas,  none  in  the  Chronicle,  two  in  Maldon*. 

1  These  are  Lichtenheld's  figures:  Z.f.d.A.  xvi,  332,  334. 
.    2  Again  I  give  Lichtenheld's  figures :  Z.f.d.A.  xvi,  334. 


170  Widsith 

Here  again,  then,  Widsith  shows  a  usage  more  archaic  than 
that  of  Beowulf,  and  much  more  archaic  than  that  of  the  other 
poems. 

III.  Definite  Article  +  Weak  Adjective  +  Noun. 

This  usage,  we  have  seen,  occurs  only  once  in  Widsith,  and 
then  in  a  passage  which,  on  the  ground  of  legend,  looks  like  an 
interpolation.  The  usage  occurs  13  times  in  Beowulf1,  60  times 
in  Genesis,  12  times  in  the  Chronicle-poems  (a  proportion  equal 
to  200  in  Beowulf).  If  we  take  Widsith  as  a  whole,  this  would 
place  it  between  Beowulf  and  Genesis.  But  if  we  are  allowed 
to  take  the  undoubted  passages  separately,  we  find  them  entirely 
free  from  this  late  usage. 

IV.  Weak  Instrumental. 

This  occurs  three  times  in  the  96  lines,  twice  in  the  64 
undoubted  lines :  an  equal  proportion,  and  one  larger  than  we 
get  elsewhere  in  O.E.  poetry.  Here  again,  then,  we  have  an 
argument  making  for  very  early  date. 

V.  Definite  Article  +  Adjective :  ]>a  selestan,  ]>a  scemestan. 
This  has  been  dealt  with  already.    It  is  a  usage  from  which 

chronological  argument  cannot  be  drawn ;  it  is  admittedly  con 
sistent  with  very  early  date. 

I  doubt  whether  we  are  justified  in  attaching  very  great 
importance  to  figures  so  limited2.  But,  if  we  are  to  draw 
inferences,  then  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  usage  of  the  definite 
article  and  of  the  weak  adjective  in  Widsith  points,  not  to  the 
eighth  century  and  the  time  before  Cynewulf,  but  rather  to  the 
time  before  Beowulf,  i.e.  to  the  seventh  century.  Brandl's 
statement  to  the  contrary  rests  upon  one  of  those  slips  from 
which  the  work  of  the  best  scholars  can  never  be  absolutely 
free. 

1  Lichtenheld  says  21  times  (Z.f.d.A.  xvi,  335).    But  eight  of  these  are 
really  examples  of  def.  art.  +  weak   adj.  (with  noun  in  apposition),  se  goda, 
m<eg  Higelaces,  not  'the  good  kinsman  of  Hygelac'  but  'the  good  one,  the 
kinsman  of  Hygelac.'     There  remain  13  undoubted  examples. 

2  Cf.  Sairazin  in  Engl.  Stud,  xxxvin,  146  etc. 


Language  and  Metre  of  Widsith  171 

Metrical  Tests. 

One  of  the  most  important  contributions  to  the  study  of 
O.E.  made  in  recent  years  was  the  essay  in  which  Morsbach 
strove  to  prove  that  certain  sound-changes,  and  especially  the 
loss  of  u  after  a  long  stem  syllable,  took  place  in  England  at 
the  end  of  the  seventh  century:  that  the  metre  of  Beowulf 
shows  that  the  shortened  form  only  was  used,  and  that  we  must 
therefore  date  Beowulf  after  7001. 

But  the  ground  upon  which  this  whole  theory  is  built  is 
rendered  infirm  by  the  scantiness  of  the  evidence.  Two  facts 
stand  out  clearly :  that  in  the  Franks-casket  inscription,  dating 
apparently  from  the  end  of  the  seventh  century,  the  u  is  found 
surviving  (flodu  for  flod) ;  that  in  charters  dating  from  692  or 
693  the  u  is  already  lost2.  The  inference  certainly  is  that 
the  u  was  lost  at  the  end  of  the  seventh  century.  But  we 
cannot  be  certain :  flodu  on  the  casket  may  be  a  deliberate 
archaism3,  it  may  be  due  to  analogy,  it  may  be  a  local 
peculiarity. 

Morsbach's  test  has  been  applied  by  Carl  Richter4  to  the 
whole  body  of  Old  English  poetry,  with  a  thoroughness 
accompanied  by  an  absence  of  dogmatism  deserving  of  the 
highest  praise.  Richter  dates  Widsith6  after  Beowulf,  but 
before  Cynewulf :  but  in  this  he  seems  to  have  been  largely 
influenced  by  Brandl's  argument  as  to  the  article6.  A  con 
sideration  in  detail  of  the  instances  noted  by  Richter  will, 
I  think,  show  that,  even  granting  the  accuracy  of  Morsbach's 
data,  and  granting  that  their  application  to  Beowulf  proves 
that  poem  to  be  later  than  700,  no  similar  result  can  be  drawn 
from  their  application  to  Widsith. 

45a.  Hro]>wulf  and  Hroftgar.  "The  substitution  of  *Hro!8- 
garu  would,"  says  Richter,  "make  an  impossible  half  line." 
Even  if  this  were  so,  it  would  not  be  quite  conclusive  against 
a  seventh  century  date.  For,  as  Morsbach  admits,  the  u  in 

1  Zur  Datierung  des  Beowulf  epos  in  the  Nachrichten  der  k.  Oesell.  d.  Wissen- 
schaften  zu  Gottingen,  1906,  pp.  251-72. 

2  in  silua  quae  dicitur  uuidmundes  felt.     Kemble,  C.D.S.  i,  40. 

3  Chadwick  in   the   Trans,  of  the   Cambridge  Philological  Society,  rv,  u, 
116,  156. 

4  Chronologische  Studien,  1910.  °  P.  92.  6  See  above,  p.  170. 


Widsith 

compound  words  was  probably  lost  before  the  u  in  mono 
syllables.  The  form  Hrcfogar,  then,  is  conceivable  in  the 
seventh  century.  But  I  do  not  think  that  Hrcfogaru  is 
unmetrical  here.  On  the  contrary  we  should  have  a  line  of 
a  rare,  but  recognized  type :  Sievers  "  Expanded  D,  9th  sub 
class1."  The  scheme  is  -*•  x  x  |  -^-6  x,  and  Sievers  quotes  seven 
examples  of  it  from  Beowulf.  For,  Hrcfywulf  being  a  proper 
name,  the  second  element  may  count  either  as  secondary 
accent  or  as  a  dip2.  All  that  can  be  demanded  is  that  such 
a  type,  to  compensate  for  its  extra  weight,  should  have  double 
alliteration.  That  condition  being  complied  with  there  is  no 
further  objection  to  be  made.  The  earliest  recorded  half-line  of 
Germanic  poetry  is  of  this  type8,  complicated  by  an  unaccented 
syllable  as  "  prelude  " : 

Ek  Hlewagastiz  Holtingaz. 

The  substitution  of  the  early  form  *Hro$garu  leaves  us  here, 
therefore,  with  a  satisfactory  line. 

This  is  hardly  the  case  with  Richter's  second  instance : 
H7b,  j/Egelmund  and  Hungar.  If  we  substitute  *Hungaru 
here  we  certainly  have  an  overweighted  line,  and  one  which 
it  would  be  difficult  to  parallel4.  For,  coming  as  it  does  in 
the  second  half  of  the  line,  the  extra  weight  cannot  be  carried 
off  by  any  double  alliteration. 

72a.  leohteste  hond.  Substituting  *hondu  we  should  have 
an  uncommon  line,  but  one  which,  as  Richter  admits,  is  not 
unparalleled.  It  would  be5  Expanded  A*,  subtype  a.  This 
type  usually  has  double  alliteration:  leohteste  *hondu  would 
have  but  one  parallel  in  Beowulf,  Wiglaf  wees  haten  (2602)B. 

1  See  P.B.B.  x,  304.     Cf.  Beowulf  (11.  712,  1790,  2462 ;    1426,  1440,  612, 
232).     Some  of  these  verses,  and  the  one  under  consideration,  might  perhaps 
rather  be  regarded  as  expanded  A  types. 

2  Dagegen  haben  die  zweiten  Glieder  von  Eigennamen  (wie  Beowulf,  Hggelac), 
nur  einen  schwacheren  Nebenton,  der  nach  Belieben  des  Dichters  zur  Bildung 
eines   besonderen   Gliedes  verwandt   oder   ignoriert  werden    kann.      Sievers, 
Hetrik  in  Pauls  Grdr.($  n,  2,  p,  30. 

3  The  dropping  of  the  final  unaccented  syllables,  which  was  completed  about 
the  year  700,  must  have  diminished  the  tendency  towards  the  "  expanded  "  type 
of  verse.     Types  which  after  700  are  rare  may  have  been  common  when,  with  a 
larger  number  of  unaccented  syllables  in  the  language,  there  was  more  oppor 
tunity  for  their  use. 

4  For  wundor  is  to  secganne  (Beowulf,  1724)  etc.  cf.  Sievers  P.B.B.  x,  255. 
8  Also  called  expanded  E,  subtype  8 :  Sievers,  P.B.B.  x,  310. 


Language  and  Metre  of  Widsith  173 

There  is  also  the  test  of  post-consonantal  h  before  vowels. 
This  also  is  supposed  to  have  been  lost  about  700.  If  Widsith 
dates  from  the  seventh  century  we  should  then  have  to  read 
and  Wal[h]a  rices  x  |  -*•  x  |  •*•  x  instead  of  and  Wala  rices  x6x\-*-x: 
an  A  line  with  prelude  instead  of  a  C  line  with  resolution. 
This  would  indeed  give  a  less  usual  type  of  line,  though  one 
not  unparalleled  :  there  are  only  four  instances  of  the  one  in 
the  second  half  lines  of  Beowulf  against  76  of  the  other1. 

To  sum  up :  there  can  theu,  I  think,  be  no  dispute  that 
verse  45a  gives  us  a  satisfactory  line,  when  we  restore  the 
seventh  century  form.  As  to  the  other  three,  there  might  be 
two  opinions.  But  they  all  occur  in  those  passages  of  the  poem 
which,  on  other  grounds,  we  have  marked  as  doubtful.  If  there 
fore  we  grant  these  lines  to  be  clumsy  or  impossible  in  a  seventh 
century  form,  we  do  not  prove  a  post-seventh  century  date  for 
Widsith.  We  merely  have  a  confirmation  of  the  doubts  which, 
on  quite  other  grounds,  Kemble,  Miillenhoff  and  Mb'ller  have 
entertained  as  to  the  originality  of  these  very  passages. 

Finally,  there  are  certain  usages  in  which  the  earliest  poems 
fluctuate.  For  example,  though  few  poems  use  early  forms 
exclusively,  we  can  get  some  estimate  of  age  from  the  proportion 
of  instances  where  the  metre  demands  the  Anglian  mutated 
form  frega  or  the  later  contracted  form  frea.  frea  Myrginga 
(Widsith,  1.  96),  according  to  Richter,  is  an  example  of  the  later 
form :  to  me  it  appears  to  be  ambiguous ;  we  could  quite  well 
scan  fre[g~\a  Myrginga,  like  dohtor  Hrotyares*,  a  type  of  which 
there  are  ten  examples  in  Beowulf3:  so  that  we  can  draw  no 
argument  from  this  line.  In  the  only  other  case  where  a  word 
of  this  type  appears,  }>eah  }>e  ic  hy  anihst,  we  must  read  anihst 
in  its  earlier  trisyllabic  form  anehist  (x  /  x)  if  we  are  to  make 
the  line  scan  at  all.  The  proportions  for  early  as  against  late 
usage  in  this  respect  are  then  in  Widsith  1  :  0,  compared  with 
36  :  48  in  Beowulf,  44  :  32  in  Genesis  A,  13:  5  in  Daniel  A4. 

As  to  the  treatment  of  syllabic  liquids  and  nasals,  we  have 
in  Widsith,  on  Richter's  reckoning,  two  examples  of  the  earlier 

1  P.B.B.  x,  234,  244.  2  Cf.  however  Eichter,  11. 

3  Sievers  in  P.B.B.  x,  233,  255.  *  Eichter,  79. 


Widsiih 

against  two  of  the  later  usage.  The  proportions  of  early  to 
late  are  in  Beowulf  35  :  42,  in  Genesis  A  17  :  73,  in  Daniel  A 
3  :  211. 

These  instances  occur  in  the  undoubted  passages  of  Widsith. 

It  may  be  unwise  to  argue  upon  such  limited  evidence : 
but  if  we  are  going  to  argue,  the  evidence  again  points  to 
Widsith  being  older  than  Beowulf,  Genesis  A,  Daniel  A — the 
three  poems  regarded  by  Richter  as  the  earliest. 

Sentence  Structure  and  Verse  Form. 

But  there  is  another  striking  characteristic  of  Widsith, 
which,  fortunately,  it  has  not  been  in  the  power  of  the  scribe 
to  obliterate  :  the  poet's  habit  of  terminating  his  sentences  at 
the  end  of  the  line,  with  the  result  that  the  poem  seems  to 
fall  into  irregular  strophes  of  anything  up  to  six  lines  in  length. 
Only  three  times  does  the  full  stop  come  at  the  half  line,  and 
in  each  case  in  a  passage  which,  on  quite  other  grounds,  has 
been  marked  as  interpolated.  The  exact  number  of  stops  in 
the  undoubted  lines  might  be  anything  from  twenty-four  to 
thirty-five  :  but  they  all  come  at  the  end  of  the  line. 

Now  this  is  a  most  unusual  feature  in  Old  English  verse, 
where  the  stop  occurs  almost  as  often  at  the  end  of  the  half 
line  as  at  the  end  of  the  line.  In  two  groups  of  poems  only 
do  we  find  consistent  and  unbroken  "  end  stopping"2.  It  occurs 
in  the  long  Riddle  (No.  XLI),  in  the  Hymn  (Grein-Wiilcker, 
II,  2,  244),  in  the  poems  on  the  Day  of  Judgement  and  on  the 
death  of  Edward  the  Confessor,  in  the  metrical  version  of  the 
Psalms  almost  without  exception,  and  in  the  Kentish  version 
of  Psalm  Li.  But  these  are  all  monkish  effusions,  written 
under  the  influence  of  the  ecclesiastical  Latin :  and  we  have 
only  to  turn  to  the  de  die  Judicii3,  or  the  riddle  of  Aldhelm, 
de  Creatura,  to  see  that  the  Old  English  poet  is  imitating  the 
structure  of  the  Latin  text  he  is  translating,  precisely  as  in  the 

1  Richter,  76. 

2  Poems  less  than  twenty  lines  in  length  are  too  short  for  purposes  of 
comparison,  yet  some  confirmation  of  the  argument  below  might  be  derived 
from  poems  lite  Ctzdmon's  Hymn  or  the  Leiden  Riddle. 

3  Bede,  v,  634,  in  Migne,  1846. 


Language  and  Metre  of  Widsith  175 

Anglo-Saxon  version  of  the  Psalms  the  strophes  correspond  to 
the  verses  of  the  Latin  original. 

But  there  is  another  class  of  poems  to  which  this  explana 
tion  does  not  apply :  for  if,  on  the  one  hand,  we  find  this 
"  end  stopping  "  in  the  monkish  poetry,  we  find  it  on  the  other 
hand  in  the  most  purely  Germanic  of  all  the  Old  English 
poems :  in  the  Charms,  in  the  Rune  Song1,  in  Deor,  and  here 
in  Widsith.  This  is  not  due  to  accident :  for  the  tendency  to 
strophic  form  is  emphasized  in  Deor  by  the  refrain,  and  occasion 
ally  in  Widsith  and  the  Charms  by  the  repetition  of  certain 
words.  Besides,  the  contrast  is  too  striking  to  be  accidental. 
For,  whilst  the  proportion  of  end-stopped  to  mid-stopped  lines 
is  in  Beowulf  385  :  282,  in  Genesis  A  259  :  255,  in  the  Elene 
105  :  138,  in  the  Andreas  221  :  112,  it  is  in  the  Rune  Song 
29  :  0,  in  Deor  10  : 0,  in  the  Charms  32  :  1  (or  rather  O2), 
in  Widsith  (undoubted  portions)  29^xtJ.  To  what,  then,  are 
we  to  attribute  this  remarkable  Difference? 

That  the  earliest  poetry  of  the  Germanic  tribes  was  lyric 
and  strophic  is  admitted.  I  believe  the  strophic  character 
of  Widsith  and  of  the  Charms  to  be  due  to  a  survival  of  the 
influence  of  this  earlier  Germanic  tradition,  precisely  as  the 
strophic  character  of  the  monkish  verse  is  due  to  the  influence 
of  example,  though  in  that  case  of  an  alien  one.  Of  this 
earliest  lyric  poetry  we  have  several  records  in  the  historians3: 
the  fullest  is  the  description  of  the  Gothic  lays  sung  in  the 
hall  of  Attila4.  We  are  told  how  two  minstrels  came  before 
Attila,  singing  songs  they  had  made  of  his  victories  and  glory 

1  Contrast  with  the  Rune  Song  the  enjambment  of  the  Cynewulfian  rune- 


8  As  some  impartial  criterion  of  what  constitutes  a  full-stop  is  necessary, 
I  follow  the  punctuation  of  Grein-Wiilcker,  where  1.  28  of  the  second  Charm  is 
printed  hal  westu.  Helpe  }nn  drihten.  Yet  a  comma  or  colon  would  perhaps 
he  better. 

I  only  count  the  three  longer  charms.  If  the  shorter  ones  had  been 
included  my  point  would  have  been  unduly  exaggerated,  since,  of  course,  a 
number  of  short  poems  would  tend  to  show  a  high  percentage  of  "end 
stopped"  sentences. 

3  Jordanes,  c.  41,  c.  49.     Cf.  also  Sievers,  Metrik  in  Pauls  Grdr.fr)  u,  2,  5. 

4  Priscus  (in  Moller,  Frag.  Hist.  Grcec.  1851,  iv,  92).     That  the  minstrelsy 
and  indeed  all  the  civilization  of  Attila's  court  was   Gothic  seems  certain. 
Cf.  Socin,  Schriftsprache  u.  Dialekte,  1888,  p.  8;    Schutte,  Oldsagn,  p.  82. 


Widsith 

in  war,  and  how  the  company  were  moved,  even  to  tears.  The 
introduction  of  two  singers  together  seems  to  postulate  either 
a  choral  lay  or  the  singing  of  alternate  stanzas ;  the  poem  too 
is  encomiastic,  not  narrative.  In  both  respects  the  minstrelsy 
differs  from  that  of  Hrothgar's  poet,  telling  in  Heorot  the  story 
of  Finnesburh.  Now,  when  Widsith  sings  before  his  lord,  it 
is  with  a  second  minstrel :  the  two  together  sing  one  song 
(for  the  company  say  they  had  never  heard,  not  better  songs, 
but  a  better  song) ;  the  song  too  is  not  a  narrative,  but  a  song 
of  praise,  the  composition  of  the  singers  themselves.  The 
coincidence  may,  of  course,  be  accidental,  and  encomiastic  and 
narrative  poetry  flourished,  we  know,  side  by  side ;  the  names 
in  Widsith  are  themselves  evidence  for  the  existence  of  many 
narrative  lays.  Yet  it  is  worth  noting  that  the  singing  before 
Widsith's  lord  reminds  us  rather  of  the  hall  of  Attila  than 
of  Hrothgar1. 

And  it  can  hardly  be  accident  that  four  poems,  the  subject- 
matter  of  which  carries  us  back  to  the  most  primitive  period, 
should  agree  in  the  retention  of  a  primitive  form.  They  may 
have  been  modernized  and  interpolated :  we  know  that  the 
Rune  Song*  and  the  Charms  have  been  largely  rewritten :  but 
all  four  seem  to  have  their  roots  in  an  age  more  primitive 
than  that  which  rejoiced  in  the  rhetorical  interlaced  periods 
of  the  Beowulf  or  Genesis :  an  age  when  the  tendency,  inherited 
from  the  strophic  poetry,  to  make  the  sentence  end  with  the 
line,  was  still  strong. 

And  here,  as  elsewhere,  we  find  a  distinction  between  the 
parts  of  Widsith :  the  Introduction,  which  on  other  grounds  we 
have  thought  to  be  later,  shows  the  enjambmenfc  familiar  in 
Beowulf:  whilst  in  11.  17  etc.  which,  on  other  grounds,  we  have 
found  to  be  exceedingly  early,  we  have,  not  merely  "end  stopping," 
but  definite  and  regular  strophic  form3. 

1  For  the  importance  of  Widsith  as  illustrating  the  duties  and  position  of 
the  scdp,  see  Anderson,  passim,  and  Kohler  in  Germania,  xv,  37  etc. 

2  Cf.  B.  M.  Meyer  in  P.B.B.  xxxn,  76.  3  Cf.  Neckel,  pp.  1-21. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

SUMMARY  AND  CONCLUSION. 

THE  passages  in  Widsith  which  show  traces  of  being  later 
additions,  and  which  were  on  that  account  rejected  by  the 
earlier  critics,  have  been  enumerated  at  the  end  of  Chapter  iv. 
A  survey  of  the  geography  of  the  poem1  has  emphasized  the 
contrast  between  the  stamp  of  definite  locality  borne  by  the 
undoubted  portions,  and  the  chaos  of  names  found  in  the 
doubtful  passages.  A  study  of  the  grammar  of  the  poem2 
has  shown  that  such  examples  of  late  usage  as  we  do  find 
occur  in  just  those  passages  which  the  earlier  critics,  on 
grounds  quite  other  than  those  of  metre  or  language,  had 
suspected  of  being  later  additions8.  The  poem  as  a  whole, 
and  still  more  the  undoubted  portions,  taken  by  themselves, 
we  find  to  be  more  primitive  in  grammar  and  metre  than 
the  poems  usually  regarded  as  the  oldest  in  English  literature, 
such  as  Beowulf  and  Genesis  A*.  Above  all,  the  habit  of  always 
concluding  the  sentence  with  the  line,  never  with  the  half  line, 
dissociates  these  undoubted  portions  of  the  poem  from  Old 
English  epic  poetry,  and  connects  them  with  a  small  group 
of  poems  which,  in  subject  matter,  all  seem  to  go  back  to  a 
more  primitive  period  than  that  of  the  courtly  or  learned  epic, 
as  we  know  it8. 

Reason  has  been  shown  for  believing  that  these  undoubted 
portions  of  the  poem  fall  into  two  sections6,  originally  distinct, 
the  Catalogue  of  Kings,  and  the  lay  of  Ealhhild  and  Eormanric 

1  Chap.  v.  2  Chap.  vi.  »  pp.  169,  173. 

Vpp.  170,  174.  B  pp.  175-6.  «  pp.  133-5. 

c,  12 


178  Widsith 

which  we  may  regard  as  the  essential  Widsith,  Widsith,  alike 
on  grounds  of  legend1  and  of  geography2,  cannot  be  the  work 
of  a  contemporary  of  Eadgils  and  Ealhhild  who  really  visited 
the  court  of  Eormanric.  The  Catalogue  of  Kings  is  older 
than  Widsith  proper8,  yet  on  account  of  the  names  it  contains 
it  can  hardly  be  earlier  than  the*  middle  of  the  sixth  century, 
and  may  be  considerably  later.  Widsith  seems  to  belong  to 
a  period  later  than  this,  but  earlier  than  Beowulf  or  Genesis : 
that  is  to  the  seventh  century. 

This  too  is  the  date  which  has  already  been  approved  by 
those  who  have  studied  the  poem  chiefly  from  the  point  of 
view  of  heroic  legend4  and  of  geography6:  it  has  been  widely 
accepted,  but  not  universally,  because  the  view  has  hitherto 
been  entertained  that  the  language  and  metre  of  Widsith 
pointed  rather  to  the  eighth  than  to  the  seventh  century. 
This  view  has  been  shown  to  rest  partly  upon  a  miscount, 
partly  upon  a  failure  to  differentiate  from  the  rest  of  the  poem 
those  parts  which  (on  grounds  not  grammatical  or  metrical) 
had  been  already  suspected  of  being  later  interpolations. 

It  has  still  to  be  shown  that  interpolation  and  amalgamation 
of  the  kind  postulated  are  inherently  probable.  For,  as  has  been 
urged  above,  it  is  not  enough  to  show  that  certain  passages  are 
inconsistent  with  others,  in  order  to  dismiss  one  or  other  as  an 
interpolation.  A  reason  which  can  have  prompted  such  inter 
polation  should  be  forthcoming6.  We  only  escape  from  one 
difficulty  into  another,  if  we  explain  an  inconsistent  text  by 
assuming  an  irrational  interpolator. 

Now,  if  a  poem  existed  telling  of  the  journey  of  a  Myrging 
minstrel  to  Eormanric,  and  enumerating  the  tribes  and  heroes 
he  had  met,  and  if,  as  is  most  probable,  a  mnemonic  catalogue 
of  tribes  and  heroes  existed  of  the  kind  we  find  so  often  in 
kindred  literatures7,  the  tendency  to  amalgamation  would  be 
strong.  If  these  poems  did  not  contain  the  name  of  ^Elfwine, 
then,  when  ^Elfwine  passed  from  history  to  the  same  plane 

1  p.  142.  2  pp.  163-5.  8  pp.  134-5,  150,  176. 

*  e.g.  Symons.     See  above,  p.  150.  5  e.g.  Much,  65. 

B  See  above,  pp.  6,  144.  7  See  above,  p.  6. 


Summary  and  Conclusion  179 

of  heroic  poetry  as  Eormanric,  the  temptation  to  add  some 
lines  mentioning  the  generosity  of  ^Elfwine  would  also  be 
strong.  An  introduction  binding  the  somewhat  inconsistent 
Catalogue  of  Kings1  with  Widsith  proper2  and  explaining  who 
Widsith,  Ealhhild  and  Eormanric  were,  would  become  necessary, 
more  particularly  when  the  Eormanric  cycle  was  beginning  to 
be  less  generally  familiar. 

Again,  our  poem  owes  its  preservation,  where  so  much  has 
been  lost,  to  the  fact  that  it  interested  a  monkish  scribe, 
probably  because  of  its  encyclopaedic  geographical  information. 
But  the  world  of  this  scribe  was  very  different  from  that  of  the 
tribal  bard  who  first  devised  the  lay.  Could  a  man  of  ancient 
days  have  been  really  travelled,  he  would  ask,  if  he  did  not 
know  of  Alexander,  had  not  seen  Medes  and  Persians  and 
Hebrews  ?  Hence  interpolations,  which  are  but  a  necessary 
corollary  of  the  new  civilization  which  had  been  superimposed 
upon  the  old  Germanic  life.  There  may  have  been  a  more 
definite  motive :  the  scribe  may  have  wished  to  bring  up  the 
number  of  tribes  to  72,  the  supposed  number  of  the  nations 
of  the  earth3 :  or  the  poem  may  have  been  transmitted  to  him 
as  an  imperfect  one,  and  he  may  have  been  filling  the  gaps  as 
best  he  could.  The  latter  hypothesis  seems  the  more  probable 
one :  for  there  are  incoherencies  in  the  poem  which  may  well 
be  the  result  of  something  having  been  lost. 

Such  a  development  seems  then  to  be  likely  enough  on 
a  priori  grounds  :  whether  the  evidence  produced  in  its  favour 
has  been  sufficient  the  reader  must  judge.  The  strength  of 
such  evidence  varies,  of  course,  in  the  different  cases:  the 

1  It  would  be  difficult  to  say  how  far  the  parallels  between  the  Catalogue 
of  Kings  (11.  18,  20,  21,  44)  and  Widsith  proper  (57,  76,  69,  61)  are  the  cause, 
and  how  far  the  result,  of  amalgamation.  The  collocation  of  Huns  and  Goths 
is  part  of  the  common  Germanic  tradition,  found  also  in  the  Elene,  and  in 
Icelandic ;  its  repetition  need  not  therefore  be  due  to  imitation ;  1.  76,  on  the 
other  hand,  is  probably  the  conscious  imitation  of  an  interpolator. 

8  The  statement  that  the  Myrging  Widsith  started  from  Angel  is  strange 
(see  note  to  1.  8).  It  may  point  to  some  details  of  the  legend,  or  some  lines 
of  the  poem  which  have  been  subsequently  lost.  If  not,  it  looks  like  a 
conscious  attempt  to  harmonize  the  Anglian  patriotism  of  11.  38-44  with  the 
Myrging  patriotism  of  11.  93-96.  LI.  84-85  may  be  an  interpolation  having 
the  same  object,  (See  note  to  1.  85.) 

8  B.  Michel  in  P.B.B.  xv,  377  etc. :  cf .  Bojunga  in  P.B.B.  xvi,  545  etc. ; 
Brandl  in  Pauls  Grdr.(%)  n,  1,  967. 

12—2 


Widsith 

spuriousness  of  the  "Biblical"  passage  rests  upon  grounds 
of  outlook,  geography,  and  metre  which  seem  to  me  over 
whelming  :  the  spuriousness  of  the  ^Elfwine  passage  rests  upon 
one  chronological  and  one  grammatical  detail,  neither  of  which 
appears  to  me  quite  conclusive. 

h 

But  much  more  important  than  these  controversies  as  to 
the  structure  of  Widsith  are  the  conclusions  we  can  draw  from 
the  poem  regarding  the  ancient  poetry  of  our  race. 

The  place  of  Widsith  in  the  history  of  Germanic 
poetry. 

In  attempting  to  estimate  the  value  of  the  Old  English 
heroic  poetry,  allowance  is  too  often  not  made  for  the  frag 
mentary  way  in  which  that  poetry  has  been  handed  down  to 
us.  We  have  not,  as  we  have  in  Homer,  that  which  the  con 
sidered  judgement  of  the  race  thought  most  worthy  to  survive 
in  its  national  poetry.  The  story  of  Beowulf  is  preserved,  not 
because  it  was  better  or  more  popular  than  other  stories,  but 
because  it  happened  to  get  written  down  (by  no  means  a 
criterion  of  merit,  in  an  age  when  there  was  little  sympathy 
between  the  monk  and  the  minstrel) ;  because  this  copy  hap 
pened  to  get  transcribed  before  it  was  destroyed ;  because,  in 
the  Middle  Ages,  it  happened  that  nobody  was  sufficiently 
energetic  to  cut  up  the  Beowulf  MS  in  order  to  bind  more 
intelligible  books  ;  because  at  the  dissolution  of  the  monasteries 
it  happened  not  to  be  used  for  packing  paper;  because  it 
happened  not  to  blaze  up  in  the  great  Cottonian  fire.  It  must 
not  then  be  taken  for  granted,  without  examination,  that  Beo 
wulf  is  a  fair  specimen  of  the  old  heroic  poetry,  still  less  that  it 
is  the  best  specimen. 

A  comparison  with  the  extant  fragments  of  the  older  heroic 
verse,  with  later  poetry  like  Maldon,  and  with  those  poems  in 
which  biblical  stories  are  told  in  the  old  epic  style,  shows  us 
that  in  style  at  least  Beowulf  is  a  noble  representative  of  its 
class.  But  is  it  so  in  plot  ? 

Monstrous  and  childish  elements,  belonging  to  the  youth  of 
a  nation,  are  often  found  surviving  sporadically  in  the  poetry 


Summary  and  Conclusion  181 

of  a  more  mature  age :  the  Cyclops  and  the  No-Man  story,  for 
example,  have  kept  their  place  in  the  most  polished  of  all 
epics.  Now,  if  the  story  told  by  Odysseus  in  the  hall  of 
Alcinous  were  all  that  remained  to  us  of  Homer,  we  should 
be  in  much  the  same  position  in  judging  the  Greek  epic  as  we 
are  when  we  try  to  judge  of  the  Old  English  heroic  poetry  from 
Beowulf.  We  should  be  puzzled  by  the  obvious  incongruity 
between  the  childish  story,  and  the  epic  dignity  with  which 
that  childish  story  is  treated.  And,  just  as  we  might  have 
been  helped  to  a  truer  perception  of  a  lost  Homer  by  the 
briefest  summary  of  the  fight  in  the  hall  of  Odysseus,  or 
by  even  such  a  travesty  of  the  xxivth  book  of  the  Iliad 
as  Tzetzes  has  left  us,  so  we  can  to  some  extent  reconstruct  the 
matter  of  the  Old  German  lays  from  Paul  the  Deacon  or  from 
Widukind,  from  the  Elder  Edda  and  the  sagas. 

Herein  consists  the  real  value  of  Widsith :  it  shows  us  what 
was  the  stock-in-trade  of  the  old  Anglian  bard  :  and  if  Widsith 
be  of  composite  origin,  this  only  makes  the  evidence  more 
representative.  Read  in  a  sympathetic  mood,  by  anyone  who 
has  taken  the  trouble  to  acquaint  himself  with  such  of  the  old 
stories  as  time  has  left  to  us,  Widsith  demonstrates  the  dignity 
of  the  Old  English  narrative  poetry,  and  of  the  common  Ger 
manic  narrative  poetry  of  which  the  Old  English  was  but  a 
section.  The  conquerors  of  Europe  were  not  primarily  inter 
ested  in  inarticulate  water-demons  or  fire-drakes.  The  stories 
told  in  their  lays  were  amongst  "  the  best  tales  sorrow  ever 
wrought."  And  we  know  from  Beowulf  that  the  style  was  not 
unworthy  of  such  matter. 

We  find  in  Widsith  no  allusion  to  Beowulf:  no  reference  to 
fights  with  giants  or  dragons :  Wada,  the  only  clearly  super 
natural  character  mentioned,  has  been  rationalized  as  the  chief 
of  a  historic  tribe1.  The  supernatural  had  a  place  in  Old 
English  heroic  verse  :  but,  as  in  the  Greek  epic,  this  place  was 
a  subordinate  one.  If  we  pass  once  more  hastily  in  review 
these  old  Germanic  tales,  we  shall  see  that  what  chiefly 

1  For  evidence  that  the  Hcelsingas  are  historic  see  note  to  1.  22.  Breca  may 
have  been  originally  mythical:  bat  he  is  grouped  with  historic  kings.  See 
above,  p.  111. 


Widsith 


interested  the  poet  was  character  :  the  behaviour  of  his  hero 
or  heroine  under  the  stress  of  conflicting  passions.  The  story 
of  Eormanric  tells  how,  stirred  by  an  evil  counsellor,  a  great  and 
aged  king  was  moved  to  take  a  wild  revenge  upon  his  young 
bride,  and  how  vengeance  befell  him ;  the  tale  of  Hagena  and 
Heoden  tells  how  mischief  was  wrought  between  a  young  chief 
and  the  father  of  his  betrothed,  so  that  no  reconciliation  could 
be  made ;  similar,  in  its  main  outline,  is  the  story  of  Sigehere 
(Sigar,  Hagbard  and  Signy),  save  that  here,  if  Saxo  has  told 
the  tale  aright,  the  poet  was  interested  rather  in  the  lovers 
than  in  the  father;  in  the  story  of  Ingeld  and  Hrothgar  we 
have  the  same  tale  once  more,  but  again  with  a  difference,  for 
here  it  is  the  mischief-maker  himself  who  attracts  the  poet's 
interest,  the  eald  cesc-wiga  whose  loyalty  to  the  old  time  is 
such  that  he  cannot  allow  the  ancient  grudge  to  be  forgotten. 
The  story  of  Guthhere  was  one  of  retainers  falling  around  their 
lord  ;  in  the  lay  of  Hnaef  and  Finn  the  retainers  at  last  take 
quarter,  and  heartburnings  and  new  sorrows  ensue  ;  in  the 
tale  of  Hrothgar  and  Hrothulf  a  noble  chief  usurps  the  throne, 
not  without  injustice  and  perhaps  treachery  to  the  sons  of  his 
benefactor,  and  in  the  end  falls  himself  by  treachery.  Occa 
sionally,  though  rarely,  the  tragedy  is  relieved.  In  the  story 
of  Wermund  and  Offa,  the  grief  of  the  old  king,  whose  heir  is 
unworthy  to  follow  him,  is  turned  into  joy  when,  in  the 
moment  of  peril,  that  heir  proves  himself  worthy.  In  the 
greatest  of  all  the  stories,  that  of  ^Elfwine  at  the  court  of 
the  Gepid  king,  the  ties  of  hospitality  overcome  the  passion  for 
revenge. 

Of  course  we  cannot  be  certain  that  in  every  one  of  these 
cases  the  name  conveyed  to  the  Anglian  minstrel  in  the 
seventh  century  just  that  meaning  which  has  been  here  indi 
cated  :  we  cannot  say,  for  example,  how  much  story  had  as  yet 
collected  round  the  name  of  ^Elfwine.  But  the  general 
deduction  to  be  drawn  from  these  names  is  not  open  to  doubt. 
It  is  that  the  old  poets  had  the  right  tragic  feeling,  the  sane 
and  just  outlook.  The  situations  are  those  which  we  find  later 
in  the  Icelandic  sagas;  in  Othello  and  Romeo  and  Juliet,  in 
Henry  IV  and  Macbeth. 


Summary  and  Conclusion  183 

The  place  of  Heroic  Poetry  in  the  Dark  Ages. 

And,  apart  from  questions  of  poetic  form  and  literary 
history,  the  fragmentary  records  of  the  old  heroic  poetry 
have  their  value  in  helping  us  to  estimate  the  meaning  of 
the  "Dark  Ages." 

With  certain  notable  exceptions  the  events  of  Western 
Europe  during  these  ages  are  told  by  contemporaries  only 
in  dry  annals  or  very  meagre  histories,  which  chronicle  the 
facts,  mostly  bloody  and  often  disgusting,  but  leave  us  in 
the  dark  as  to  the  motives  of  the  men  who  did  the  deeds. 
Sometimes  the  history  of  Western  Europe  seems  to  be  only 
one  monotonous  sordid  tale  of  lust  and  bloodshed.  Yet  this  is 
an  illusion.  The  acts  of  fratricide  and  treachery  which  caused 
an  upheaval  are  just  the  things  which  find  their  way  into  the 
brief  annals ;  the  daily  life,  the  long  years  of  faithful  devotion 
of  the  retainer  to  his  lord,  are  taken  for  granted.  Yet  without 
such  faithful  devotion  the  retention  of  the  throne  during  many 
centuries  in  the  hands  of  one  family,  Amal,  Bait,  Merowing, 
Iceling,  would  not  have  been  possible.  We  obviously  need 
some  corrective  to  the  annalists. 

The  motives  of  the  leading  figures  in  the  history  of  these 
ages  can  seldom  be  accurately  measured :  it  is  still  more  diffi 
cult  to  estimate  the  feelings  of  the  rank  and  file.  But  the 
fragments  of  the  old  heroic  poetry  show  us  at  least  what  kind 
of  men  these  retainers,  the  "  swaese  gesithas,"  wished  to  be. 
The  story  of  England  in  the  days  of  Ethelred  the  Unready,  as 
told  by  chroniclers  and  homilists,  is  a  sorry  record  of  defeat. 
We  are  ready  to  exclaim  with  Falstaff  "Is  there  no  virtue 
extant  ? "  till  the  poem  of  Maldon  makes  us  feel  ashamed  of  the 
estimate  we  have  formed  of  tenth  century  England.  Or  to 
take  a  rather  earlier  and  perhaps  healthier  period.  The  eighth 
century,  to  judge  from  the  Anglo-Saxon  Chronicle,  seems  a 
welter  of  internecine  strife,  treachery  and  cruelty  ;  yet  the  men 
among  whom  the  song  of  Beowulf  was  loved,  however  given  to 
deep  drinking  and  hard  fighting,  were  not,  in  the  main, 
treacherous  and  cruel.  It  is  the  fallacy  of  the  brief,  unex 
plained  annal.  Stated  in  bare  annalistic  form,  the  deeds  of 


184  WicMth 

Shakespeare's  noblest  men,  of  Brutus,  Hamlet,  or  Othello,  would 
appear  as  the  acts  of  a  gang  of  gaol-birds.  Had  we  more  of 
the  old  lays,  whether  English,  Gothic,  Old  Saxon  or  Frankish, 
this  impression  of  cruelty  would  probably  be  softened;  we 
should  find  that  deeds  of  murder  and  treachery  did  not  meet 
with  approval  when  songs  were  sung  and  talk  was  free  in  the 
mead  hall,  after  the  day's  hunting. 

Only  too  often  we  hear  in  the  annals  of  the  guardian  uncle 
or  retainer  who  supplants  his  young  king.  What  Gothic  singers 
had  to  say  about  such  things  we  learn  from  Cassiodorus'  allusion 
to  the  song  of  Gensimund.  Gensimund,  a  valiant  chief,  though 
not  by  birth  an  Amal,  was  adopted  into  the  royal  house.  After 
the  king's  death  the  throne  was  offered  to  him,  but  he  refused 
it,  remaining  faithful  to  the  young  princes,  so  that  he  is  famed 
in  song  and  will  never  be  forgotten  so  long  as  the  Gothic  name 
lasts1. 

Of  Beowulf  almost  exactly  the  same  is  told  us.  He  was 
received  by  his  king,  and  treated  no  whit  worse  than  the  king's 
own  sons2.  When  the  old  king  and  his  sons  were  dead,  the 
last  widowed  queen  offered  the  kingdom  to  Beowulf :  "  she 
trusted  not  to  her  son  that  he  could  hold  the  throne  against 
foreign  foes,  now  his  father  was  dead.  But  none  the  more 
could  the  helpless  folk  in  any  wise  prevail  upon  the  prince 
[Beowulf]  that  he  should  be  lord  over  Heardred  and  accept  the 
kingdom  :  but  he  supported  him  amid  the  folk  with  friendly 
counsel,  love  and  honour,  till  he  grew  older  and  ruled  over  the 
Weder-Geatas3." 

1  Heinzel   (Hervararsaga  in   W.S.B.  cxiv,  497)  suggests  that  the  faithful 
Gizur  of  that  saga  is  a  survival  of  Gensimund.     Mullenhoff  (Z.f.d.A.  xn,  254) 
sees  in  Gensimund  the  historic  forerunner  of  the  Hildehrand  of  later  story. 
Mullenhoff  (as  subsequently  Scherer)  assumes  that  Gensimund  has  a  place  in 
Gothic  history,  as  the  guardian  of  the  father  and  uncle  of  Theodoric  the  Great. 
He  would  thus  come  very  near  to  the  Master  Hildebrand  of  High  German 
tradition.     But  the  insertion  of  Gensimund  into  Gothic  history  at  this  point  is 
a  mere  conjecture  of  R.  Kopke  (Die  Anfange.  des  Konigthums  bei  den  Gothen, 
Berlin,  1859,  p.  141)  to  which  further  currency  was  given  by  Dahn's  apparently 
independent  hypothesis   (Konige  der   Germanen,  Bd  n,  Miinchen,   1861,   pp. 
60-61).     The  difficulties  of  this  chronology  are  shown  by  Hodgkin  (Italy,  in,  9). 
We  have  no  sufficient  grounds  for  making  Gensimund  an  historic  figure,  though 
he  may  well  have  been  such.     W.  Scherer  (Review  of  Heyne's  Bedvulf  in  the 
Zeitschrift  fur  die  osterreichischen  Gymnasien,  xx,  1869,  p.  95)  seems  to  have 
been  the  first  to  draw  attention  to  the  remarkable  parallel  between  Gensimund 
and  Beowulf. 

2  2435,  etc.  s  2370,  etc. 


Summary  and  Conclusion  185 

Nowhere  do  we  find  the  judgement  of  the  mead-hall  ex 
pressed  better  than  in  the  change  undergone  by  the  story 
of  the  treachery  of  the  Frankish  Theodoric.  The  Theodoric  of 
history  lured  his  old  foe  Irminfrid  of  Thuringia  into  his  power, 
with  promises  of  safe  conduct  and  with  rich  gifts.  Then,  as 
they  were  talking  one  day  on  the  walls  of  Ziilpich,  Irminfrid 
was  pushed  over,  and  killed.  Who  actually  did  the  deed  was 
never  known :  Theodoric  was  suspected  of  having  insti 
gated  it1. 

But  poetry  did  not  allow  Theodoric  to  enjoy  the  fruits  of 
his  treachery.  In  the  place  of  the  unknown  assassin  was 
substituted  a  demi-god  :  that  Iring  who  had  left  his  mark 
across  the  heavens  in  what  we  call  the  Milky  Way.  We 
wonder  what  that  figure  is  doing  in  the  character  of  traitor : 
till,  when  Theodoric  disclaims  the  crime,  Iring  rises  to  the 
height  of  his  daemonic  power,  slays  the  perfidious  king, 
humiliates  him  even  in  death ;  and  then  making  his  way 
through  the  midst  of  the  royal  retinue,  vanishes. 

"  The  greater  part,"  said  Sir  Thomas  Browne,  "  must  be 
content  to  be  as  though  they  had  not  been ;  to  be  found  in  the 
register  of  God,  not  in  the  record  of  man.  Diuturnity  is  a 
dream  and  folly  of  expectation."  Yet  in  the  old  heroic  poetry 
we  get  a  glimpse  of  the  thoughts  of  those  men  whose  unre 
corded  lives  and  deaths  have  done  more  towards  the  building 
up  of  Europe  than  have  the  intrigues  and  quarrels  of  their 
lords.  This  should  render  sacred  not  only  every  recorded  line 
of  the  old  poems,  but  every  paraphrase  and  every  allusion. 

1  Sed  quis  eum  exinde  deiecerit  ignoramus ;  multi  tamen  adserunt  Theudorici 
in  hoc  dolum  manifestissime  patuisse.     Gregorii  Hist.  Franc,  p.  116. 


TEXT  OF  WIDSITH,   WITH  NOTES. 

A  very  accurate  facsimile  of  the  Exeter  Book  was  made  for  the  British 
Museum,  and  checked  by  Sir  Frederic  Madden  in  Feb.  1832  (Add. 
MS.  9067).  It  was  upon  this  facsimile  that  Kemble  based  his  text,  but 
only  after  comparison  with  the  transcript  of  the  Exeter  Book  which  had 
been  already  made  by  Thorpe,  who,  however,  did  not  publish  till  1842. 
Mr  Anscombe's  theory  (Anglia,  xxxiv,  526-7)  that  Thorpe  derived  his 
text  from  Kemble  is  disproved  by  Kemble's  express  statement,  and  by 
the  fact  that  Thorpe's  text  is  much  the  more  correct  of  the  two. 

Later  editors  based  their  texts  on  Kemble  and  Thorpe,  either  directly 
or  at  second  hand,  till  Schipper  again  collated  the  Exeter  Book  in  1870-1, 
and  published  his  results  in  1874.  Wiilcker  again  collated  the  MS.  for  his 
Kleinere  Dichtungen  (1879 ;  1882).  The  text  in  his  edition  of  Grein's 
Bibliothek  (1883)  is  even  more  accurate,  and  may  be  the  result  of  a 
second  collation.  Moller,  who  published  in  the  same  year,  and  all 
subsequent  editors,  based  their  texts  upon  this. 

Some  details  as  to  the  relations  of  the  different  editions  of  Widsith  to 
one  another,  and  of  the  British  Museum  facsimile  to  the  MS.  at  Exeter,  are 
given  by  the  present  editor  in  Anglia,  xxxv,  393-400. 

I  have  twice  examined  the  MS.  and  noted  the  marks  of  length,  and 
one  or  two  other  details  not  recorded  by  Wiilcker :  but  there  is  nothing 
of  importance  to  be  added  to  his  collation  of  the  MS. 

A  collation  of  the  seven  chief  texts  of  Widsith  was  appended  by 
Wiilcker  to  his  text  of  the  poem,  issued  in  1883.  In  a  volume  specially 
devoted  to  Widsith  it  seemed  right  to  go  somewhat  more  into  detail.  The 
first  and  second  editions  of  Kemble  have  accordingly  been  distingxiished 
(Kj  and  K2).  They  differ  considerably,  Kemble  having  incorporated  into 
his  second  edition  many  important  emendations.  As  Leo  founded  his 
text  upon  Kemble's  second  edition,  with  a  general  acknowledgement  only, 
credit  for  Kemble's  elucidations  of  the  text  has  sometimes  been  given  to 
later  editors.  By  collating  the  edition  of  Ettmviller  published  in  1839, 
and  Lappenberg's  commentary  of  the  same  year,  the  important  part 
played  by  both  these  scholars  in  the  interpretation  of  the  text  of  Widsith 
is  made  more  clear. 

The  texts  given  by  Ebeling,  Schaldemose,  Klipstein,  Moller,  and  Kluge 
in  his  Lesebuch  have  also  been  consulted.  The  text  of  Ebeling  is  exceed 
ingly  bad ;  he  follows  Ettmullerd)  but  with  many  misprints  and  many 
wanton  alterations,  whilst  Klipstein  derives  direct  from  Thorpe  (Cod.- 
Ex.}.  Schaldemose  gives  the  MS.  readings,  recording  the  conjectures  of 
Kemble,  Leo,  Ettmiiller  in  his  footnotes.  He  generally  adopts  these 
conjectures  in  his  translation.  Corruptions  have,  however,  crept  into 
his  text  (e.g.  11.  33,  93,  98,  118).  Accordingly  the  readings  of  Ebeling, 
Klipstein  and  Schaldemose  have  not  usually  been  recorded.  Nor  have 


188  Widsith 

Holler's  transpositions  been  noted,  as  they  can  be  clearly  understood 
only  by  consulting  his  complete  text.  The  texts  of  Holthausen  and 
Sedgefield,  which  appeared  whilst  this  edition  was  in  the  press,  have 
also  been  compared. 

A  number  of  the  readings  of  the  earlier  editors  are  due  to  the  elemen 
tary  condition  of  Old  English  studies  in  their  time :  such  for  example  as 
that  of  Ettmiiller  and  Schaldemose  in  1.  134  ]>enden  he  here  [for  her]  leaf  aft 
"  so  lang  er  Heerfahrt  liebet "  :  "  mens  Feide  ban  elsker."  Whilst  fully 
recognising  how  excellently  the  earlier  editors  did  their  work,  I  have  not 
felt  compelled  to  carry  respect  for  them  so  far  as  always  to  record  these, 
and  similar  obvious  blunders,  which  they  could  not  have  made  had  they 
possessed  the  apparatus  of  dictionaries  and  grammars  which  we  now  have. 
Neither  have  readings  been  recorded  which  are  misprints  or  oversights. 
The  earlier  editors,  Kemble,  Leo,  Ettmiiller,  attempted  to  normalize  the 
text,  writing  or  suggesting  on  for  an  (3rd  pers.  plu.),  i  for  ie,  h  for  g,  est 
for  ast,  eo  for  ea,  se  for  e.  In  most  cases  it  seemed  unnecessary  to  record 
again  wanton  alterations  of  this  kind,  as  they  will  be  found  in  the  appa 
ratus  criticus  of  Grein-Wulcker.  In  the  few  cases  where  my  collation  did 
not  agree  with  that  of  Wiilcker,  I  have  verified  the  reading. 


WIDSID  MADOLADe,        wordhord  onleac, 
se  be  [monna]  maest         maet/ba  ofer  eorban, 
folca  geondferde:         oft  he  [on]  flette  gebah 
mynelicne  mabbum.         Him  from  Myrgingum 

Widsith  spake,  unlocked  his  store  of  words,  he  who  of  all  men  had 
wandered  through  most  tribes  and  peoples  throughout  the  earth :  oft  in 
hall  had  he  received  the  lovely  treasure.  His  race  sprang  from  the 

1.  WidstfS.    A  proper  name,  that  of  the  supposed  traveller :  not,  as  the  earlier 
editors,  before  Thorpe  (1842),  take  it :  "  the  long  journey  "  spoken  of  by  him 
"who  wandered  through  most  tribes."     Wiilcker  (Kl.  D.  164)  also  supported 
this  rendering :  bnt  in  his  Grundnss  (328)  he  regards  WidstiS  as  a  proper  name. 
The  name  is  recorded  as  having  been  borne  in  historic  times  (Uidsith,  Liber 
Vitae,  179).     Cf.  Koegel,  Ltg.  i,  1,  138. 

2.  se  \e  monna  mcest  mceg]>a  ofer  eor]>an.     The  MS.  reads  se  \>e  mast  mcer\>a 
ofer  eorban  ;  so  Kj :  K2  conjectured  se  \e  mast  fandode  mceg\>a  ofer  eor\>an :  Leo, 
Ettmiiller  d)  and  Schaldemose  adopted  fandode  but  kept  mcefya,  which  they 
rendered  "das  was  geriihmt  wird  iiber  die  Erde,"  "  Mannruhm  "  etc.:  mcest 
gemunde  mcer&a,  Ettmiiller  (2)  andBieger  :  mcest  mette mcerSa,  Thorpe  (Cod.  Ex.): 
mast  mcegfta  mette,  Thorpe  (Beowulf). 

se  \e  monna  mcest  mceglpa ...  is  Grein's  reading ;  it  was  at  once  endorsed  by 
Miillenhoff  (Z.f.d.A.  xi,  275)  and  later  by  Moller,  Gr.-Wiilcker,  Holt,  and 
Sedg.  Eluge,  however,  retains  meer\>a,  being  probably  influenced  by  the  parallel 
passage  in  Beowulf  (2645) 

/orfcan  he  manna  mcest  mceriSa  gefremede. 
For  the  construction,  cf.  also  Judith  (181) 

\e  us  monna  mcest  mofftra  gefremede 
sarra  sorga. 
on  flette.    on  supplied  by  Grein,  followed  by  all  later  editors. 

4.  mynelicne.    a?ra£  \ey6/j.(vov.    Not  "  memorable  "  as  Thorpe  (Cod.  Ex.) 
following  Ettmiiller's  "  Erinnerungs  Kleinod":  but  "lovely,"  " pleasant,"  cf. 
Icel.  munlegr,  "  pleasant,"  O.S.  munilika  magcfc,  "  a  lovely  maiden." 

5.  Him  from  Myrgingum  cet>elo  onwocon.    The  MS.  has  hine  from  Myrgingum 
ce\ele  onwocon,  concerning  which  Conybeare  remarked  ' '  it  may  imply  that  the 
nobles  of  bis  own  country  had  encouraged  him  to  travel,  as  appears  to  have 


Text  (tt.  1-8)  189 

5  aej^elo  onwocon.     He  mid  Ealhhilde, 
fselre  freojmwebban,         forman  sij?e 
HreScyninges         ham  gesohte 
eastan  of  Ongle,         Eormanrices, 

Myrgings :  it  was  with  the  gracious  lady  Ealhhild  that  he  first,  from 
Angel  in  the  East,  sought  the  home  of  the  Gothic  king  Eormanric,  fell  and 
faithless. 

been  the  case  with  Gunnlaug.  See  Gunnlaug  Sag.  p.  96."  [The  reference  is  to 
the  Copenhagen  edition  of  1775.  But  the  passage  probably  does  not  bear  the 
interpretation  put  upon  it.  Yet  the  travels  of  the  poets  Gunnlaug  and  Widsith 
offer  an  interesting  parallel.]  Kemble,  Leo,  Ettmiiller  and  Thorpe  also  keep 
the  MS.  reading.  This,  however,  is  impossible,  for  onwacan  is  intransitive. 
Thorpe  (Cod.  Ex.,  notes)  suggested,  though  he  did  not  read,  him  :  "from  him 
among  the  Myrgings  nobles  sprung,"  comparing  Beowulf,  112,  and  the  mention 
of  cnosl  below.  Klipstein  follows  Thorpe's  conjecture,  which  is  possible,  but 
not  likely,  for  cnosle  in  1.  52  probably  means  kindred,  not  offspring.  Him  from 
Myrgingum  aftelu  onwocon  is  Grein's  reading,  and  has  been  followed  by  later 
editors  (aebelo,  Bieger,  Grein-Wulcker,  Kluge,  Holt.,  Sedg.). 

5.  Ealhhilde.     See  Introduction,  pp.  21-28. 

6.  falre  freobuwebban.    Fcele  in  this  connection  is  a  hackneyed  epithet :  feele 
friSowebba  (Elene,  88)  :  fcele  freoftoscealc  (Gen.,  2301,  2497),  fcele  freoftuweard 
'(Guthlac,   144),   of.   Holler,   V.E.   32-3;   Grimm,   Andreas  u.    Elene,   143-5; 
Lawrence  in  Mod.  Philol.  TV,  350-1. 

Freobuwebbe  was  rendered  "  Fridensweberin  "  by  Leo  ;  so  Ettmiiller,  Thorpe, 
etc.  But  it  must  not  be  supposed  that  Ealhhild  goes  to  the  court  of  Eormanric 
to  negociate  peace.  The  idea  conveyed  by  freobuwebbe  is  rather  that  of 
domestic  peace  than  of  diplomatic  service ;  cf.  Lawrence  in  Mod.  Philol. 
iv,  350. 

forman  sibe,  Gummere(i)  translates  "  once."  But  it  probably  means  more 
than  this.  In  Beowulf  (716)  where  forma  sfS  occurs  in  a  similar  context, 
it  is  emphatic  enough  : 

Ne  wees  beet  forma  sift 
bat  he  Hrobgares  ham  gesohte. 
So  Gummere(2),  "first." 

7.  Hreftcyninges.     See  Appendix,  Note  H  :  The  term  Hreedas  applied  to  the 
GotJis.     Holt,   regards  as   a  common   noun:    glorious   king,   "Ruhmkdnig." 
But  cf.  Frescyning  (Beowulf,  2503). 

8.  Ongle.    The  old  home  of  the  Angles,  the  Angulus  of  Bede,  the  Angel  of 
King  Alfred.     Now,  in  the  second  century,  the  Goths  were  dwelling  on  the 
banks  of  the  lower  Vistula,  due  east  of  Angel.     By  the  third  century  they  had 
left  their  old  home,  and  were  soon  on  the  shores  of  the  Black  Sea,  whilst  by  the 
sixth  century  they  were  mainly  in  the  south  and  west  of  Europe.     Critics, 
reading  eaxtan  of  Ongle  as  a  statement  that  the  Goths  dwelt  east  of  Angel 
(Grimm,  Heldensage,  18,  19  ;  Leo,  76  ;  Boer,  Ermanarich  und  Dietrich,  p.  12  ; 
cf.  Weiland,  15  ;  Gummere  in  M.L.N.  iv,  210),  have  seen  in  this  a  proof  of  the 
early  date  of  the  poem  (Miillenhoff,  D.A.  n,  99 ;  Klipstein,  11,  422 ;  Moller, 
V.E.  32;  Weiland,  15  ;  Koegel,  Ltg.  i,  1,  179).     The  words,  however,  cannot 
mean  this  :  "  The  home  to  the  east  of  Angel "  would  be  ham  be  eastan  Ongle. 

In  the  course  of  a  controversy  with  Sarrazin,  Sievers  examined  elaborately 
the  syntax  of  the  O.E.  adverbs  of  place  with  verbs  of  motion  (P.B.B.  xn,  168, 
etc. ;  also,  less  important,  xi,  361 ;  cf.  Erdmann,  48).  In  Pauls  Grdr.  d)  i,  408, 
he  shows  the  bearing  of  this  upon  Widsith.  Eastan  of  Ongle  means  "  from  the 
east,  from  Angel,"  and  was  apparently  written  by  a  resident  in  England, 
referring  to  the  old  Anglian  home  in  the  east.  It  therefore  tends  to  prove  the 
later  date  of,  at  any  rate,  this  introduction.  But  the  whole  thing  is  puzzling. 
Why  should  a  Myrging  bard  start  from  Angei  ?  See  Introduction,  p.  165, 179,  note. 


190  Widsith 

wra)>es  wserlogan.     Ongon  J?a  worn  sprecan: 
10  "  Fela  ic  monna  gefrsegn         msegjmm  weald  an  ; 

sceal  beod[n]a  gehwylc         beawum  lifgan, 

eorl  sefter  obrum         eSle  rsedan, 

se  }>e  his  beodenstol         gebeon  wile ! 
85  a  ||  fara  wses  [HJwala         hwile  selast 

15  ond  Alexandreas         ealra  ricost 

He  began  then  to  speak  many  words : 

"  Of  many  men  have  I  heard,  ruling  over  the  nations.  Every  chieftain 
must  live  virtuously  (one  lord  after  another,  ruling  his  land),  he  who 
desires  his  throne  to  nourish. 

Of  these  was  Hwala  for  a  time  the  best,  and  Alexandreas  most  mighty 

9.  wrabes  warlogan.  The  same  expression  is  in  the  Andreas  (613)  applied 
to  the  Devil.  Thorpe  assumed  a  gap :  "Here  some  lines  are  evidently  wanting, 
although  there  is  no  hiatus  in  the  MS.,  as  the  words  wrfyes  wserlogan  cannot 
apply  to  Eormanric,  the  object  of  the  poet's  praise."  But  this  assumption  is 
groundless.  See  Introduction,  pp.  34-36. 

worn.     Many  words  ;  cf.  Beowulf  (530). 

11.  beodna.    MS.  beoda,  so  Kd).    beodna,  the  conjecture  of  K(2),  was  adopted 
by  Leo,  and  has  been  accepted  by  all  later  edd.,  except  Thorpe  (Cod.  Ex.)  and 
Ettmuller(2). 

12.  eorl  after  obrum.     See  Leo  (87).     Moller  (V.E.)  followed  by  Ten  Brink 
(539)  transposed  verses  11,  12,  to  the  great  improvement  of  the  sense. 

14.  Hwala.     MS.  Wala,  followed  by  K(i)(2),  Leo,  Schaldemose.     Thorpe  and 
Eieger  attribute  to  Kemble  the  emendation  Hwala  :  but  it  seems  to  have  been 
made  by  Ettmuller  (J.     It  is  clearly  right,  and  has  been  adopted  by  all  later 
edd.    Hwala,  son  of  Beowi  (Bedwi)  son  of  Sceaf,  is  found  in  the  West  Saxon 
pedigree  in  three  MSB.  of  the  Chronicle  (Cotton  Tiberius  A  vi,  B  i,  B  iv :  see 
entry  for  year  855,  death  of  ^Ejjelwulf). 

That  Kemble  should  have  overlooked  so  obvious  a  correction  here  is  strange, 
for  whilst  editing  Widsith  he  was  also  working  at  the  O.E.  genealogies,  and  had 
pointed  out  that  Wala  in  the  later  versions  of  these  genealogies  should  be  read 
Hwala  :  "  Wir  werden  hernach  sehen  dass  die  Lesart  Hwala  allein  die  richtige 
ist,  wenn  wir  die  herrschende  Alliteration  in  diesen  Listen  betrachten." 

See  Kemble,  Ueber  die  Stammtafel  der  Westsachsen,  Munchen,  1836,  pp. 
11-13,  26. 

15.  ond  Alexandreas.    Obviously  Alexander  the  Great :  though  Grein  would 
read  ond  as  a  preposition,  "  among  the  Alexandrians,"  and  Haigh,  in  his  vain 
attempt  to  make  all  the  heroes  of  Widsith  contemporary,  interpreted  the  name 
as  a  reference  to  one  of  the  sixth  century  Alexanders  mentioned  by  Procopius. 
Holt,  suggests  Alexandras. 

Mullenhoff,  followed  by  Bieger,  condemned  11.  14-17,  on  the  ground  that 
they  interrupted  the  sequence,  for  after  the  mention  of  Ermanaric  in  1.  8  we 
should  expect  the  catalogue  to  begin  among  the  Goths  and  their  neighbours  : 
he  therefore  supposed  14-17  interpolated  by  the  same  hand  as  11.  75-87  ;  they 
"show  the  same  combination  of  national  tradition  [Hwala]  with  idle  monastic 
learning"  [Alexandreas,  Alexander  the  Great,  with  the  name  assimilated  to 
that  of  the  saint  Andreas].  Other  edd.  (e.g.  Ebeling)  condemn  only  1.  15 
(Alexandreas).  The  fact  that  the  scribe  of  the  Exeter  Book,  or  perhaps  an 
earlier  transcriber,  did  not  know  who  Hwala  was,  and  misspelt  his  name,  shows 
that  Hwala  had  been  forgotten,  and  is  therefore  against  the  theory  that  line  14 
is  a  late,  monastic,  interpolation.  Nor  need  the  reference  to  Alexander  be  the 
result  of  monastic  learning.  That  the  Alexander  story  was  well  known 
throughout  western  Europe  is  proved  by  king  Alfred's  reference  to  Nectanebus 


Text  (II  9-19)  191 

1 6  monna  cynnes         ond  he  rasest  gebah, 
]?ara  J>e  ic  ofer  foldan         gefrsegen  haebbe. 
-(Etla  weold  Hunum,         Eormanric  Gotum, 
Becca  Baningum,         Burgendum  Gifica. 

of  all  the  race  of  men,  and  flourished  most  of  those  of  whom  I  have  heard 
tell  throughout  the  world.... 

(Orosius,  ed.  Sweet,  1883,  E.E.T.S.  p.  126),  by  the  Macedonian  descent  attri 
buted  to  the  Franks  (Otfrid,  Evang.  i,  1,  87-91)  or  Saxons  (Widukind,  i,  2), 
and  by  the  Old  English  translation  of  Alexander's  letter  to  Aristotle.  The 
mediaeval  Alexander  saga  has  its  root  in  popular  traditions  going  back  to  the 
third  century  of  the  Christian  era  (see  Notice  des  Manuscrits  contenant  I'histoire 
fabuleuse  d'Alcxandre  le  Grand  par  J.  Berger  de  Xivrey,  in  the  Notices  et 
Extraits  des  Manuscrits  de  la  Bib.  du  Eoi,  Paris,  t.  xm,  1838,  p.  178 :  Spiegel 
Die  Alexander  sage,  Leipzig,  1851,  p.  2).  Alexander  may  therefore  well  have 
been  known  by  name  among  German  tribes  at  a  very  early  date.  According  to 
Jordanes  Ermanaric  and  Alexander  had  been  coupled  together :  Hermanaricus 
...quern  merito  nonnulli  Alexandra  Magno  comparavere  maiores  (ed.  Mommsen, 
xxm).  So,  though  11.  14-17  are  probably  later,  we  cannot  be  certain. 

18.  Mtla.   Kluge  has  pointed  out  that  this  form  of  the  name  corresponds  to 
the  O.N.  Atli,  as  against  the  M.H.G.  Etzel,  O.H.G.  Ezzilo  (by  i-umlaut  from 
Attilo).    The  English  and  Norse  forms  come  from  a  syncopated  *Atlo,  pre 
sumably  the  Low  German  form  about  500  A.D.     See  Engl.  Stud,  xxi  (1895), 
447.     But  the  form  Etla  also  is  found  in  England. 

Hunum.... Gotum.  A  rough  approximation  to  geographical  order  can  be 
traced  throughout  this  catalogue:  11.  18,  19  deal  with  the  tribes  and  chiefs 
of  Eastern  Germany.  Ostrogoths  and  Huns  were  not  only  neighbours,  but 
closely  associated  in  story  both  as  allies  and  as  foes.  Hence  they  are  again 
coupled  below  (1.  57)  and  twice  in  the  Elene  :  Huna  leode  ond  Hreftgotan,  20; 
Huna  ond  Hrefta  here,  58.  So  in  the  Icelandic  Lay  of  Hloth  and  Angantyr  : 

Ar  kv6$o  Humla  Hunom  rctfSa, 
Gitzor  Gautom,  Gotom  Anganty... 

where  Gautom  is  very  possibly  a  miswriting  for  Grytingom — the  Greutungi,  a 
Gothic  tribe.  See  C.P.B.  i,  349. 

19.  Becca.     The  Bikki  of  Northern  story.    See  Introduction,  pp.  19,  20,  33. 
Mentioned  again,  1.  115,  as  one  of  Eormanric's  retainers.     The  facts  that  he 
is  here  spoken  of  as  prince  of  an  independent  tribe,  that  in  Saxo  he  is  son  of 
a  Livonian  king,  and  that  the  Atlakvi\>a  mentions  the  "warriors  of  Bikki" 
Bikka  greppa  (see  C.P.B.  i,  57,  Symons  u.  Gering,  i,  426-7),  seem  to  indicate 
that  in  the  original  story  Becca  was  the  prince  of   a  tributary  race,  not  a 
Gothic  servant  of  Ermanaric. 

Baningum.  Miillenhoff  (Z.f.d.A.  xi,  276-7)  suggests  that  this  is  a  fictitious 
name  "  the  sons  of  the  slayers,"  <f>ovd5<u — a  fit  tribe  for  the  faithless  Becca  to 
rule.  This  would  necessitate  a  :  but  on  metrical  grounds  it  is  better  to  read  a. 
The  name  means  then,  presumably,  "  the  righteous,  hospitable  "  (Icel.  beinn, 
see  Much,  126),  a  name  which  might  have  been  assumed  by  a  real  people. 
This  interpretation  seems  preferable  to  the  "  Beininge "  of  Holthausen  [of 
course  beinn  may  be  connected  with  O.E.  ban,  Germ,  bein,  through  the  meaning 
"  the  straight  (i.e.  shin-)  bones  "].  The  probability  that  the  Banings  were  a 
real  people  is  increased  by  an  apparent  reference  to  them  in  the  Origo  gentix 
Langobardorum  where  the  land  of  the  Bains  is  linked  with  that  of  the 
Burgundians,  just  as  here  Banings  and  Burgundians  are  classed  together. 

But  this  does  not  enable  us  to  identify  the  Banings  with  any  known  tribe. 
Schiitte  (Oldsagn,  61,  106)  suggests  the  Sarmatians.  But  evidence  to  prove 
this  is  lacking.  The  Sarmatians  had,  Schiitte  points  out,  a  king  Beuka 
(Jordanes,  LIV). 

Burgendum.    Originally  an  East  Germanic  tribe,  and,  in  the  second  and 


192  Widsith 

20  Casere  weold  Creacum         ond  Gaelic  Finnum, 

third  centuries,  neighbours  of  the  Goths.  See  Ptolemy,  n,  11,  8-10  (where  they 
are  mentioned  as  dwelling  north  of  the  Lygii:  i.e.  in  the  modern  Fosen)  and 
perhaps  in,  5,  8  (where  if  the  Bnrgundians  are  to  be  identified  with  the 
$povyoi{v]5lw}>es  they  must  have  extended  east  of  the  Vistula).  From  Jordanes 
(xvn)  it  is  clear  that  Goths,  Gepidae  and  Burgundians  were  neighbours  about  the 
middle  of  the  third  century,  when  Fastida  was  encouraged  by  his  victory  over 
the  Burgundians  to  attack  the  Goths  under  Ostrogotha.  (Nam  Burgundzones 
pene  usque  ad  internicionem  delevit.)  After  this  the  Burgundians  moved  west, 
and  by  the  end  of  the  third  century  were  threatening  Gaul.  (Cum  omnes 
barbarce  nationes  excidium  universes  Galliae  minarentur,  neque  solum  Burgun- 
diones  et  Alemanni,  sed  et  Heruli  et  Chabones  in  has  provincias  irruissent — 
Mamertinus,  Panegyr.  i,  5;  289-290  A.D. )  For  the  later  history  of  the  Bur 
gundians  see  Introduction,  p.  63.  This  mention  of  the  Burgundians  along 
with  the  Eastern  folk  seems  accordingly  a  reminiscence  of  a  state  of  things 
which  had  passed  away  before  the  fourth  century  (see  H.  Derichsweiler, 
Geschichte  der  Burgunden,  1863 ;  Bremer  in  Pauls  Grdr.  (2)  in,  824),  and  hence 
an  indication  of  a  very  early  date  for  at  least  this  section  of  the  poem.  We 
cannot  be  quite  certain  of  this,  however,  for  a  portion  of  the  Burgundian  nation 
may  have  remained  in  the  East.  Burgundians  are  reckoned  by  Sidonius 
Apollinaris  among  the  host  of  Attila  invading  Gaul  in  451  (Cam.  vn,  322),  and 
it  has  been  supposed  that  these  were  "a  portion  of  the  tribe  who  had  lingered 
in  their  old  homes  by  the  Vistula  "  (Hodgkin's  Italy,  u,  107).  Whether  there 
were  any  Burgundians  by  the  Vistula  so  late  as  this  may  be  doubted.  Attila's 
Burgundians  may  well  have  been  a  portion  of  the  Bhenish  people,  which  may 
have  been  incorporated  by  the  victorious  Huns,  after  the  Burgundian  defeat  in 
437.  The  main  body  of  the  Burgundian  survivors  was,  of  course,  in  the 
opposite  camp  (Jordanes,  ed.  Mommsen,  xxxvi). 
Gifica.  See  Introduction,  p.  64. 

20.  Casere.     The  emperor  of  the  East.     The  Kaiser's  name  was  so  current 
in  early  Germanic  times,  that,  at  last,  as  the  son  of  Woden,  he  comes  to  stand 
at   the  head   of  the  East  Anglian   genealogy.     (See  Florence  of  Worcester, 
ed.  Thorpe,  i,  249.)     He  occupies  this  position  in  that  genealogy  as  given 
in  MS.  C.C.C.C.  183,  and  in  MS.  Cotton  Vespasian  B  6,  where  we  should  read 
caser,  not  (as  Sweet,  Oldest  English  Texts,  171)  care.     The  word  casere  may 
well  have  been  borrowed  very  early  :  possibly  through  Anglian  mercenaries  in 
Roman  pay  (cf.  Hoops,  Waldbdume,  569).     For  Casere  see  also  note  in  M.L.E. 
iv,  1909,  p.  508. 

Creacum.  The  Greeks.  Paul  (P.B.B.  i,  197)  has  argued  that  the  C,  which 
is  always  found  in  this  word  both  in  the  East  and  West  Germanic  dialects,  and 
which  was  only  driven  out  later  by  the  influence  of  the  Latin  Graecus,  is  due  to 
the  fact  that  the  last  stage  of  the  Germanic  sound  shifting  was  not  completed 
when  the  word  was  borrowed  from  the  Latin,  and  that  hence  the  voiced  stop 
became  voiceless  along  with  the  other  similar  sounds.  This  would  make  the 
word  a  very  early  loan  indeed.  A  more  probable  theory  is  that  of  Kossinna 
(Weinholdfestschrift,  Strassburg,  1896,  p.  40)  and  Kluge  (Pauls  Grdr.  d)  i,  325) 
who  suppose  that,  at  the  time  the  word  was  borrowed,  the  voiced  stop  g  had 
not  come  again  into  use  at  the  beginning  of  words,  and  that  thus  the  voiceless 
stop  k  was  substituted,  as  the  nearest  approximation. 

For  the  spelling  Creacum  for  Crecum,  here  and  in  1.  76,  cf.  Holthausen, 
165.  See  also  Introduction,  p.  166. 

Ccelic.  Heinzel  (Hervararsaga  in  W.S.B.  cxiv  (1886)  p.  507)  suggests  that 
this  is  a  corrupt  form  of  Kalew.  It  is  certainly  the  case,  as  Heinzel  points 
out,  that  stranger  corruptions  are  found  in  the  Anglo-Saxon  and  Old  Norse 
genealogies.  The  MS.  has  C$lic  ( =  Gaelic). 

21.  Hagena.     See  Introduction,  p.  100,  etc. 

Holm-Rygum.  An  emendation  of  Grimm  (G.D.S.  469  ;  following  a  suggestion 
of  Lappenberg,  175)  for  the  MS.  Holmrycum.  Grimm's  conjecture  is  certain 
(cf.  1.  69) :  it  has  been  followed  by  later  editors.  Ettm.,  Thorpe,  Ebeling, 
Klipstein,  and  Grein,  however,  follow  Leo,  Holmricum,  or  MS.  Holmrycum. 


Text  (II  20,  21)  193 

ax  Hagena  Holm-Ry^rum         ond  Heoden  Gloramum. 

The  Bugian  name,  like  the  Gothic,  is  found  both  in  Scandinavia  and  in 
Eastern  Germany  (Pauls  Grdr.  (2)  in,  818;  Much  in  P.B.B.  xvn,  184).  The 
Scandinavian  Rygir,  Holmrygir  (Island-Eugians)  dwelt  in  Bogaland,  on  the 
banks  of  the  southernmost  islands  and  fiords  of  Norway.  But  not  even  the 
Norwegian  versions  place  Hogni  in  Norway.  Saxo  puts  him  in  Jutland,  and 
Snorri  imagined  him  as  dwelling  well  to  the  south  of  Norway.  The  Holmryge 
are  therefore  more  probably  the  Rugii  of  Tacitus,  a  people  dwelling  on  the 
Baltic  coast  not  far  from  the  Goths  (protinus  delude  ab  Oceano  Rugii;  Ger- 
mania,  XLIII).  That  these  were  also  known  as  ' '  Island-Bugians  "  is  clear  from 
Jordanes,  according  to  whom  the  Goths,  on  leaving  Scanzia,  reach  the  main 
land  unde  max  promoventes  ad  sedes  Ulmerugorum,  qui  tune  Oceani  ripas 
insidebant,  castra  metati  sunt,  eosque  commisso  proelio  propriis  sedibus  pepu- 
lerunt,  eorumque  vicinos  Vandalos  iam  tune  subiugantes  suis  aplicavere  victoriis 
(ed.  Mommsen,  iv).  The  Island-Bugians  must  have  dwelt  on  the  islands  and 
peninsulas  at  the  mouth  of  the  Vistula  (Miillenhoff  in  Mommsen's  Jordanes) 
and  perhaps  also  of  the  Oder  (Zeuss,  484),  whence  the  modern  Biigen.  It  is  to 
be  noted  that,  according  to  Saxo,  the  last  fight  of  Hoginus  and  Hithinus  took 
place  on  the  island  of  Hiddensoe  (Hythini  insula)  off  the  coast  of  Biigen. 

Later  the  Bugians  moved  south,  and  in  the  fifth  century  occupied  the 
present  Austria.  The  story  of  Hagena  and  Heoden,  essentially  one  of  sea 
roving,  could  accordingly  no  longer  be  associated  with  them.  Hence  the 
confusion  of  the  later  versions  :  Kudrun  places  Hagen  in  Ireland :  the  Sgrla 
\>dttr  and  Saxo  in  Denmark. 

That  Widsith  still  connects  the  story  with  a  tribe  which,  by  the  fifth 
century,  had  ceased  to  be  maritime,  is  another  proof  of  early  date:  but  the 
possibility  that  the  reference  is  to  the  Norwegian  Holmrygir  must  not  be  left 
quite  out  of  sight.  Compare  Koegel,  Ltg.  i,  1,  169  ;  Miillenhoff  in  Z.f.d.A.  xxx, 
230;  Pauls  Grdr.(2)  in,  826-7;  Panzer,  H.G.  436-7.  Boer  (Z.f.d.Ph.  xxxvm, 
47)  would  make  the  Danish  islands  the  original  home  of  the  "  Island-Bugians." 
But  there  is  no  evidence  for  this.  Bugge  (H.D.  314-5)  sees  a  connection 
between  the  Holmryge  and  the  Bogheimr  of  Helga  kvffia  Hjyrvarftssonar,  43. 
This  again  seems  unlikely. 

Heoden.  MS.  Henden.  The  emendation  Heoden  (which  is  certainly  right, 
although  Schaldemose,  Ettmiiller^),  Thorpe,  Ebeling,  Klipstein,  and  Grein 
retained  the  MS.  reading)  was  suggested  by  J.  Grimm  (Z.f.d.A.  n,  2  ;  cf.  G.D.S. 
470).  Moller  suggests  an  intermediate  Headen  :  so,  independently,  Anscombe 
in  Anglia,  xxxiv,  527 :  in  view  of  11.  70,  111,  it  is  quite  likely  that  Heoden  was 
written  Headen :  and  ea  would  then  easily  be  miswritten  en. 

Glommas.  Lappenberg  (175),  Miillenhoff,  Nordalb.  Stud,  i,  151,  Grimm, 
G.D.S.  752,  Thorpe,  Grein  (Sprachschatz),  and  Holt,  suggest  a  connection  with 
Norway  (the  river  Glommen).  It  is  in  favour  of  this  conjecture  that  Saxo 
places  Hithinus  in  Norway,  as  apparently  does  the  catalogue  of  the  battle  of 
Bravalla  (Hythin  gracilis,  in  Saxo,  vin,  p.  258).  See  also  Introduction, 
p.  109,  note. 

Conybeare  would  make  the  Glommas  "  a  Sorabic  tribe,"  his  evidence  being 
apparently  Ditmar  v.  Walbeck,  who  speaks  of  "  provintiam  quam  nos  Teutonice 
Deleminci  vocamus,  Sclavi  autem  Glomaci  appellant "  (Thietmari  Chronic&n,  i, 
3,  recog.  F.  Kurze,  Hannoverse,  1889).  Glomazi  is  the  modern  Lommatzsch 
near  Dresden.  The  ancient  province  coincides  approximately  with  the  later 
Erzgebirgischer  Kreis  of  the  electorate  of  Saxony.  For  the  exact  limits, 
cf.  Kurze's  note  to  Ditmar,  and  Bottger's  Diocesan-  u.  Gaugrenzen  Norddfutsch- 
lands,  iv,  224,  etc.  That  there  is  any  connection  between  Glomazi  and 
the  Glommas  is,  however,  in  the  highest  degree  unlikely.  Still  more  so  is  the 
suggestion  of  Koegel  (Ltg.  i,  1, 169)  that,  as  Heoden's  folk,  the  Glommas  should 
be  sought  near  the  mouth  of  the  Schelde.  This  is  an  application  to  Widsith  of 
features  belonging  to  a  much  later  version  of  the  story. 

The  only  evidence  then,  though  that  is  insufficient,  points  to  Norway  as  the 
home  of  the  Glommas. 

c.  13 


Widsith 

22  Witta  weold  Swsefum,        Wada  Hselsingum, 

22.  Witta  occurs  in  the  genealogy  of  Hengest  as  given  by  Bede,  H.E.  i,  15 ; 
and  following  Bede,  by  the  Laud  MS.  of  the  A.  S.  Chronicle :  Hengest  and  Horsa, 
\<zt  wcer&n  Wihtgilses  suna.  Wihtgils  wees  Witting,  Witta  Wecting,  Wecta 
Wodning.  The  same  genealogy  is  also  given  in  the  Historia  Brittonum,  §  31, 
cf.  Grimm,  D.M.  Anhang,  iv,  v.  A  not  very  probable  conjecture  by  Fahlbeck 
as  to  the  origin  of  this  genealogy  will  be  found  in  A.T.f.S.  vm,  48.  The  name 
Witta  is  found  associated  with  that  of  Watte  (?  =  Wade)  in  a  tradition  of 
Northern  Schleswig,  recorded  by  Miillenhoff.  Vitte  and  Vatte  are  two  dwarfs 
dwelling  in  neighbouring  hills  :  a  farmer  passing  one  hill  at  night  is  told  to 
"  greet  Vitte,  Vatte  is  dead."  See  Mulleuhoff,  Sagen,  Mfirchen  und  Lieder  der 
HerzogtMlmer  Schleswig-Hohtein  u.  Lauenburg  (1848),  No.  400,  p.  242.  In 
England  the  name  is  found  in  Wittanham  in  Berkshire  (see  Binz  in  P.B.B.  xx, 
221). 

Swcefum.  Swabians,  Suevi.  The  name  is  used,  broadly,  to  cover  a  large 
number  of  tribes  in  central  Germany :  Nunc  de  Suevis  dicendum  est,  quorum 
non  una  ut  Chattorum  Tencterorumve  gens ;  majorem  enim  Germanics  partem 
obtinent  propriis  adhuc  nationibus  nominibusque  discreti  quamquam  in  commune 
Suevi  vocentur.  (Germania,  xxxvin.)  Schwabsted  in  Schleswig,  compared 
with  the  South  German  Schwaben,  perhaps  bears  witness  to  this  wide  diffusion. 
But  Tacitus  probably  exaggerates  the  extent  of  the  Suevic  name,  making 
it  cover  the  Angles,  and  many  tribes  of  Eastern  and  Northern  Germany  who 
were  very  probably  not  of  Suevic  stock.  That  the  Suevi  extended  as  far  as 
the  coast  is  probable  from  a  passage  in  the  Agricola  (xxvni)  where  some 
shipwrecked  men  fall  first  into  the  hands  of  the  Suevi,  then  of  the  Frisii 
(primum  a  Suevis,  mox  a  Frisiis  intercepti) ;  see  Chadwick  (203).  Amongst  this 
large  family  of  Suevic  tribes  there  was,  however,  one  tribe  to  which  the  name 
peculiarly  belonged :  the  Suebi  of  Caesar,  dwelling  on  the  Main.  These,  after 
many  wanderings,  mingled  with  the  Alamanni,  themselves  Suevi  in  the  broader 
sense  of  the  word,  and  to  this  mingled  stock  the  name  Swabian  has  in  later 
times  been  specially  applied.  See  Bremer  in  Pauls  Grdr.  (2)  m,  918-38.  The 
name  had  therefore  two  significations,  one  broader,  the  other  more  particular. 
Below,  where  the  Swcefe  are  linked  with  the  Angles  (11.  44,  61),  the  reference  is 
apparently  to  the  northernmost  section  of  the  great  people,  dwelling  near  the 
modern  Schwabsted  (Much,  28,  102) :  and  here  the  context  favours  a  similar 
explanation.  Whereas  in  1.  44  the  Swsefe  are  apparently  synonymous  with  the 
Myrgings,  it  should  be  noted  that  here  the  two  peoples  are  clearly  distinguished. 

Wada,  see  Introduction,  p.  95,  etc. 

Halsingum.  Miillenhoff  (Z.f.d.A.  vi,  65;  cf.  xi,  278)  regards  this  as  a 
feigned  name,  connected  with  hals,  the  neck,  or  prow  of  a  ship  (flota  fami- 
heals,  Beowulf,  218)  chosen  as  appropriate  to  the  people  of  a  hero,  like  Wada, 
connected  with  the  sea.  More  probably  the  Hselsingas  are  a  real  people,  whose 
colonists  have  left  their  name  in  many  places  on  the  Baltic  coast :  Helsingor 
(Elsinore)  in  Zealand ;  Helsingborg  on  the  adjacent  coast  of  Sweden  ;  Helsing- 
land,  a  province  of  Sweden ;  Helsingfors,  on  the  opposite  coast  of  Finland.  In 
spite  of  this  wide  diffusion,  there  is  considerable  agreement  among  philologists 
in  placing  the  original  home  of  the  Hselsingas  on  the  XdXoixros  7roTOyoi6s  of 
Ptolemy,  but  great  disagreement  in  identifying  this  with  any  modern  river. 
Zeuss  (150),  Seelmann,  who  argues  the  question  at  length  (43),  Weiland  (27) 
and  Chadwick  (204)  suggest  the  Trave;  Moller  (V.E.  28)  the  Eider  or  Halerau  ; 
Miillenhoff  (Nordalb.  Stud,  i,  115)  the  Eider  ;  Much  (P.B.B.  xvn,  186)  the 
Warnow.  Cf.  also  Moller,  A.f.d.A.  xxn,  155. 

In  any  of  these  cases  the  Hselsingas  would  be  neighbours  of  the  Angles,  and 
probably  of  "Anglo-Frisian"  stock.  (Kogel,  Ltg.  i,  1,  155-6.)  If,  as  is 
probable  (cf.  Panzer,  H.G.  436),  the  Middle  High  German  Wate  von  den 
Stilrmen  means  Wade  "of  Stormarn  "  this  would  be  a  strong  argument  for 
placing  Wade's  people,  the  Healsingas,  in  that  district,  i.e.  on  the  Trave.  In  any 
case  Wade  and  his  people  are  to  be  put  on  the  Baltic  coast  :  and  with  this  the 
reference  in  the  Thidreks  saga  agrees  (c.  57,  Vafte  rise  er  a  Siolande). 


Text  (II  22-24)  195 

13  Meaca  Myrgingum,         Mearchealf  Hundingum. 
peodric  weold  Froncum,         pyle  Rondingura, 

23.  Meaca.  Mullenhoff  (Nordalb.  Stud,  i,  152)  followed  by  Bieger,  conjectured 
Meara,  the  eponymous  form  from  which  Myrging  might  be  supposed  to  be 
derived.     He  abandoned  the  conjecture  (Z.f.d.A.  xi,  277)  but  returned  to  it 
(Beovulf,  99).    In  Z.f.d.A.  xi,  277  Mullenhoff  would  connect  Meaca  with  O.E. 
gemaca,  Icel.  maki,  companion,  and  would  interpret  Mearchealf  as  "colleague." 
He  apparently  regarded  the  two  as  forming  a  heroic  pair,  the  Theseus  and 
Pirithous  of  early  German  story. 

Mearchealf.  Ettmullerd)  suggested  Mearcvulf  (notes,  p.  15)  but  returned 
to  Mearcealf  in  his  second  edition.  Mearcvulf  was  also  suggested  in  a  note  by 
Bieger,  who  however  retained  Mearchealf  in  his  text,  following  Miillenhoff's 
explanation  (see  Meaca,  above).  If  we  read  Mearcwulf  we  must  interpret  as 
the  Marculf  of  Salomo  and  Saturn.  Sophus  Bugge  (H.D.  171)  has  independently 
made  the  same  suggestion  as  Ettmiiller,  pointing  out,  what  is  at  any  rate  an 
odd  coincidence,  that  Marculf  is  spelt  Marcholfus  by  Notker.  Marculf 's  son 
and  successor  in  Middle  English  verse  is  Hendyng.  It  would  be  rash  to  argue 
any  connection  between  this  name  and  the  Hundingas  whom  Mearchealf  rules 
(cf.  Binz,  P.B.B.  xx,  222). 

Hundingum.  King  Hunding  is  mentioned  in  the  prose  introduction  to  the 
song  of  Helgi  Hundingsbani,  Hundingr  het  rikr  konungr,  vfy  hann  er  Hundland 
kent  (Symons,  Edda,  i,  272).  Tribal  and  kingly  names  tend  to  interchange : 
cf.  Hoeing,  below,  and  Scylding.  The  Hundings  are  apparently  to  be  placed  on 
the  south  coast  of  the  Baltic  See  Mullenhoff  in  Nordalb.  Stud,  i,  153,  Z.f.d.A. 
xi,  278,  xxni,  128,  170  ;  Jiriczek,  292  ;  Bugge,  H.D.  91,  169-70;  P.B.B.  xxxix, 
479.  Hund  may  be  either  from  hund  "dog,"  or  hund  "hundred";  in  the 
former  case  we  may  compare  the  cynocephali  of  Paulus  (i,  11),  see  also 
Anscombe  in  Eriu,  iv,  87  ;  for  the  latter  compare  Tacitus'  mention  of  the 
hundred  pagi  of  the  Semiiones  (German in,  xxxix).  For  another  interpreta 
tion,  see  Chadwick,  299-300. 

24.  peodric.     See  Introduction,  p.  112.    Moller  (V.E.  18)  supposes  Theodric 
to  be  an  interpolation  from  some  poem  dealing  with  the  victory  won  by  Theodric 
over  Hygelac.     There  is  little  to  be  said  in  favour  of  this  conjecture,  which 
seems  to  spring  from  the  very  common  habit  of  exaggerating  the  importance  of 
those  remnants  of  the  old  epics  which  happen  to  have  come  down  to  us.     The 
rout  of  Hygelac  was  only  one   of  Theodric's  victories,  less  important  and 
less  personal  than  many  others. 

Froncum.  If  the  name  of  the  Franks  means  the  "  spearmen,"  as  argued  by 
Kluge  (Etymol.  Worterbuch)  and,  with  some  doubt,  by  Erdmann  (Die  Angeln, 
80),  then  we  might  take  the  "Bondingas  "  as  an  epic  fiction  echoing  the  name. 
"Theodric  ruled  the  Spearmen:  Thyle  (his  retainer)  the  Shieldmen." 

But  it  seems  unlikely  that  the  Franks  derived  their  name  from  the  franca, 
for  two  reasons.  (1)  As  has  been  frequently  noted,  the  root  frank  =  spear  is  not 
found  in  continental  German,  but  only  in  English  and  Scandinavian  dialects. 
(2)  Equal  attention  has  not  been  given  to  the  argument  that  the  franca  was 
used  certainly  as  much,  possibly  more,  by  other  nations.  The  characteristic 
Frankish  weapon  was  the  hurling  axe,  frequently  referred  to  by  Procopius  (see 
Keller,  M.L.,  Anglo-Saxon  Weapon  Names,  Heidelberg,  1906,  pp.  18-31,  133-4). 
According  to  Agathias  (n,  5)  the  Franks  used  a  peculiar  barbed  spear,  the  anyo 
(cf.  our  angle)  similar  to  the  "  cruelly  hooked  boar  spear  "  which  in  Beowulf  is 
used  to  attack  sea-monsters.  Agathias  gives  a  detailed  description  of  the  ango : 
it  was  a  species  of  harpoon,  and  could  not  be  withdrawn  from  a  wound.  Some 
good  illustrations  of  these  weapons,  recovered  from  the  graves  of  Bipuarian 
Franks,  will  be  found  in  Archteologia,  xxxvi,  78-84  (cf.  also  xxxv,  48-54). 
There  seems  to  be  no  connection  between  the  ango  and  the  O.E./ranca,  which 
was  a  gentlemanly  weapon  : 

he  let  his  francan  wadan 
tzs  hysses  hals. 

13—2 


196  Widsith 

25  Breoca  Brondinguwi,         Billing  Wernum. 

According  to  Procopius,  the  Franks  in  A.D.  539  were  remarkable  for  not  carry 
ing  spears:  lirvtas  fiev  6\lyovs  rivas  dfi<f>l  rbv  riyotj/jievov  ^o^Tes,  ot  dr)  Kal  /J.6voi 
S6pa.ro,  H<pepoi>.  ol  Xotirol  S£  vefbi  airavres  oCre  r6£a  afire  S6pa.ro.  £xo»res,  dXX&  £/0os 
re  KO.I  do-vLda  <ptpwv  g/caerros  Kal  ir£\CKW  &/a.  (Bell.  Gott.  II,  25.)  It  is  very 
doubtful,  therefore,  if  the  word  Frank  conveyed  the  idea  of  "  spearman."  The 
rival  etymology  "  the  Freemen"  suggested  by  Grimm,  G.D.S.  512,  etc.  is  also 
open  to  grave  doubt:  it  has  been  supported  by  Bremer  in  Pauls  Grdr.(2) 
HI,  878.  (But  cf.  P.B.B.  xxv,  223,  etc.) 

pyle.    See  Introduction,  p.  115. 

Rondingum.  Perhaps  an  epic  fiction,  the  "  shield  men  "  (a  name  appropriate 
to  the  retainers  of  Thyle,  Theodric's  follower)  as  Mullenhoff  suggested.  No 
historic  tribe  of  this  name  is  known  :  it  certainly  means  "  men  with  shields,"  cf. 
Icel.  hyrningr,  one  carrying  horns.  (See  Much  in  P.B.B.  xvu,  120 ;  Binz  in 
P.B.B.  xx,  148;  Miillenhoff  in  Z.f.d.A.  xi,  281;  Chadwick,  284.)  Leo  (77), 
Conybeare  (12),  Lappenberg  (178)  and  Brandl  (Pauls  Grdr.  966)  suppose  the 
Bondings  to  be  a  real  people,  and  their  name  to  be  preserved  in  the  Beudigni 
of  Tacitus :  a  somewhat  unlikely  conjecture.  For  these  Beudigni  see  Much  in 
P.B.B.  xvn,  192. 

25.  Breoca  Brondingum.  Breca  also  in  Beowulf  rules  over  the  Brandings. 
See  Introduction,  p.  110. 

Billing.  This  name  is  best  known  in  connection  with  the  famous  house 
which  ruled  in  Saxony  during  the  latter  part  of  the  tenth  and  the  whole  of  the 
eleventh  century.  See  Prutz,  Staatengeschichte  des  Abendlandes  im  Mittelalter, 
1885,  i,  189,  400 ;  E.  Steindorff,  De  ducatus  qui  Billingorum  dicitur,  origine, 
Berolini,  1863  ;  E.  Wintzer,  De  Billungorum  intra  Saxoniam  ducatu,  Bonn®, 
1869.  The  name  is  of  frequent  occurrence  in  England,  Lappenberg's  statement 
(Geschichte,  i,  214)  notwithstanding,  and  has  left  its  mark  in  names  like 
Billingborough,  Billinge,  Billingham,  Billinghay,  Billingshurst,  Billingsgate, 
Billington.  Of  the  original  Billing  nothing  is  known,  but  we  may  assume, 
from  his  connection  here  with  the  Werne  or  Waernas,  and  the  subsequent 
appearance  of  the  name  in  England  and  Saxony,  that  he  was  essentially  a  hero 
of  the  coast  tribes.  See  also  Grimm,  D.M.  (219 :  trans.  Stallybrass,  i,  373-4)  : 
Kemble,  Saxons,  i,  458  (Appendix  A).  For  name  (bill,  sword)  cf.  Ronding  above. 

Billing's  daughter  is  the  beloved  of  Odin  :  Hdvajndl,  96. 

Wernum.  The  Varini  of  Tacitus,  a  people  closely  connected  with  the 
Angles,  and  belonging  to  the  group  of  Nerthus-worshipping  tribes.  We  gather 
from  the  order  of  Tacitus'  enumeration  that  the  Varini  probably  dwelt  North  of 
the  Angles,  and  their  name  may  perhaps  be  preserved  in  Warnces  (i.e.  Warna 
nses,  promontorium  Varinorum,  now  corrupted  to  Warnitz,  a  promontory  in 
the  N.E.  of  Sundewitt).  See  Mullenhoff  in  Nordalb.  Stud,  i,  129.  Procopius, 
in  the  middle  of  the  sixth  century,  makes  the  OOapvoi  spread  as  far  as  the 
Bhine,  which  separates  them  from  the  Franks  :  dnJKovfft  6t  OX/M  re  fs  &iceavbi>  rbv 
apKTtpov  Kal  iroTa.iJ.bv  'Pfjvov  Sffwep  atfrotfs  re  dioplfei  Kal  &pdyyovs.  (Bell.  Gott.  iv, 
20,  1833;  a  strange  story  follows  of  a  war  between  the  Angles  of  Brittia  and 
the  Warm.)  Another  reference  (11,  15)  marks  the  Warni  as  dwelling  more 
where  we  should  expect  them  :  south  of  the  Danes.  The  Varini  can  hardly 
have  occupied  these  wide  stretches  of  country  continuously,  as  Hodgkin  (Italy, 
in,  355)  seems  to  suppose.  They  must  have  been  scattered,  and  settled  in 
isolated  groups.  Hence  the  difficulty  of  localizing  the  Werini  of  the  Lex,  and 
the  Guarni  addressed  by  Theodoric.  (See  Appendix  E :  The  original  home  of 
the  Angli  and  Varini.)  That  a  contingent  also  accompanied  the  Angles  to 
England  appears  likely  from  the  names  Wernanbroc,  Wernanford,  Warnanhyll, 
Wernanwyl.  (See  Seelmann,  Die  Ortsnamenendung  -leben  in  the  J.d.N.f.n.S. 
xn,  1886,  p.  23 :  for  other  place  names,  many  very  doubtful,  see  Haigh 
(113) ;  certainly  not  Warwick  as  suggested  by  Miiller,  Lex  Salica,  123 ; 
corrected  by  Mullenhoff,  Nordalb.  Stud,  i,  133.  See  also  Zeuss,  360 ;  Mullen 
hoff,  D.A.  iv,  465;  Much  in  P.B.B.  xvn,  204;  Bremer  in  Pauls  Grdr.(2) 
in,  851.) 


Text  (II  25-29)  197 

16  Oswine  weold  Eowum         ond  Ytum  Gefwulf, 
Fin  Folcwalding        Fresna  cynne. 
Sigehere  lengest         Sse-Denum  weold, 
Hnaef  Hocingum,         Helm  Wulfingum, 

26.  Oswine.  Unknown,  unless  he  is  to  be  identified  with  the  Oslaf  mentioned 
in  the  Fhmesburh  episode  in  Beowulf.     See  Much  in  Herrigs  Archiv,  cvm,  407 
and  cf.  Grimm,  G.D.S.  472,  and  Miillenhoff  in  Z.f.d.A.  xi,  281. 

Eowum.  Allowing  for  the  interchange  of  eo  and  ea  (Beowa  and  Beawa, 
Z.f.d.A.  vn,  411)  and  assuming  a  weak  nominative  Eawan,  we  have  the  Aviones 
of  Tacitus  (see  Miillenhoff,  Nordalb.  Stud,  i,  156;  Grimm,  G.D.S.  472  ;  Koegel, 
Ltg.  i,  1,  155).  The  Aviones  belong  to  the  group  of  Nerthus-worshipping 
people.  Much  (P.B.B.  xvii,  195)  would  locate  them  on  the  islands  of  the 
Cattegat,  interpreting  the  name  as  "  Islanders."  Bremer  (Z.f.d.Ph.  xxv,  129) 
suggested  that  the  name  was  preserved  in  the  traditions  of  the  North  Frisian 
islands,  as  recorded  by  Hansen.  In  the  muster  of  warriors  in  the  Sylt  story  we 
have  "De  Uuwen  kam  fan  Uasten,"  the  Uuwen  came  from  the  east;  aud 
Bremer  derived  Uuwen  from  a  primitive  Auwaniz,  whence  Aviones,  Eawan  :  see 
C.  P.  Hansen,  Uald  Sold'ring  Tialen,  1858,  p.  22,  and,  dissenting  fromBremer's 
suggestion,  Moller  in  A.f.d.A.  xxn,  158.  Subsequently  Much  (2  101,  and  in 
Hoops  Reallexikon,  i,  146),  whilst  adhering  to  the  explanation  of  Eowan, 
Aviones  as  "Islanders,"  would  place  them  in  the  North  Frisian  islands  of  the 
North  Sea  rather  than  in  the  Baltic. 

It  has  also  been  proposed  to  connect  the  Eowan  with  Oeland  (called  Eowland 
in  Alfred's  Orosius,  ed.  Sweet,  p.  20).  But  this  would  take  us  into  quite 
another  part  of  the  Baltic.  We  need  an  identification  of  the  Eowan  which 
leaves  them  neighbours  of  the  Waernas  and  of  the  Yte.  This  is  supplied  by  the 
connection  with  the  Aviones,  but  not  by  the  connection  with  Eowland. 

Ytum.     See  Appendix,  Note  D  :  The  Jutes.     Gefwulf  is  unknown. 

27.  Fin  Folcwalding.     See  Introduction,  p.  67. 

Fresna  cynne.  See  Introduction,  p.  67,  and  compare  Zeuss,  136  etc. ;  Grimm, 
G.D.S.  668-81 ;  Erdmann,  83-86  ;  Siebs  in  Pauls  Grdr.  (2)  i,  1153  ;  Bremer  in 
Pauls  Grdr.  (2)  in,  844-849.  Cf.  also  note  to  1.  68  below. 

For  the  structure  of  the  two  lines,  26,  27,  see  Neckel,  pp.  5,  6,  47,  480. 

28.  Sigehere.     Undoubtedly  identical  with  the   O.N.  Sigarr  (Heinzel  in 
A.f.d.A.  xvi,  272).      Saxo,  Bk  vn,  tells  how  Sygarus,  king  of  Denmark,  caused 
Hagbarthus,  the  lover  of  his  daughter  Sygne,  to  be  slain,  and  how  Sygne  shared 
her  lover's  death  (ed.  Holder,  pp.  230-237).     The  story  is  a  particularly  fine 
one.     It  must  have   been   popular  throughout  the   Scandinavian  countries : 
references  to  it  are  frequent,  especially  in  the  form  of  place  names  (Heinzel). 
The  tale  is  also  extant  in  a  Danish  ballad,  of  which  there  are  many  versions. 
See  Danmarks  Gamle  Folkeviser,  udgivne  af  Svend  Grundtvig.     Kjtfbenhavn, 
1853  etc.  i,  1,  258-317.    But  in  England  it  seems  to  have  been  little  known, 
and  the  name  Sigehere  is  rare.      (Binz  in  P.B.B.  xx,   169  ;  cf.  Miillenhoff, 
Beovulf,  52.) 

lengest.  Sygarus  is  styled  senilis  by  Saxo  (ed.  Holder,  237).  I  understand 
lengest  here,  and  in  1.  45,  below,  to  mean  "for  a  very  long  time."  Cf.  the  use 
of  swi~$ost  for  "very  greatly"  in  Alfred's  Boethius  (p.  37,  ed.  Sedgefield,  1899). 

29.  Hncef  Hocingum.     Strictly  Hnaef  is  himself  the  son  of  Hoc  :  but  the 
family  name  is  extended  to  his  people,  just  as  in  Beowulf  the  Danes  are  called 
Scyldingas,  from  the  ancestor  of  their  kings.     Hoeing  is  perhaps  found  for 
the  hero  Hoc,  the  father  of  Hnaef,  in  the  genealogy  of  Hildegard  the  wife  of 
Charles  the  Great,  whose  grandfather  and  greatgrandfather  bore  the  names 
of  Nebi  [?  =  Hnasf]  and  Huochingus  (see  Miillenhoff  in  Z.f.d.A.  xi,  282).     Hilde 
gard  was  of  Alamannic  race,  and  we  have  therefore  in  the  juxtaposition  of 
these  two  names  an  indication  that  the  story  was  known  in  High  Germany  in 
the  seventh  century.     The  names  of  the  heroes  of  this  cycle  are  found  fairly 
frequently  in  England,  but  more  particularly  that  of  Hoc  (see  Binz  in  P.B.B. 
xx,  179-186). 


198  Widstith 

30  Wald  Woingum,         Wod  pyringuw, 

For  the  use  of  Hoeing  both  as  a  family  name,  and  as  equivalent  to  that  of 
the  ancestor  Hoc,  cf.  Vylsungr,  which  is  applied  not  only  to  members  of 
the  family,  but  also  to  the  eponymous  ancestor,  who,  in  Beowulf,  is  called, 
more  correctly,  Wcels. 

Helm.  Perhaps  the  imaginary  name  of  a  typical  king:  cf.  the  common 
expression  helm  Scyldinga,  Scylfinga.  But  it  is  no  mere  fiction  of  our  poet,  for 
that  there  was  a  hero  Helm,  though  his  story  has  been  lost,  is  likely  from  the 
mention  of  a  Helmes  treow  (Cart.  Sax.  ed.  Birch,  in,  1213)  whilst  a  Helmes 
welle  is  mentioned  several  times  in  Domesday  Book.  The  Helming  family 
— presumably  that  of  which  Helm  was  the  eponymous  ancestor — is  referred  to 
in  Beowulf  (620),  and  place  names  derived  from  Helming  are  fairly  common  in 
England  (see  Haigh,  63  ;  Binz  in  P.B.B.  xx,  177-8).  Continental  parallels  are 
not  so  easy  to  find :  but  there  seems  reason  to  suppose,  with  Ettmiiller  d)  17, 
some  connection  with  the  Helmschrot  or  Helmschart  of  German  story  (Dietrichs 
Flucht  passim).  At  any  rate  Helmschrot,  Helmschart  and  Helmnot  all  belong 
to  the  Wiilfinge  (cf.  Matthaei  in  Z.f.d.A.  XLVI,  55-6). 

Wulfmgum.  The  name  occurs  in  Beowulf.  Ecgtheow  having  incurred 
a  blood  feud  mid  Wilfingum,  Hrothgar  pays  the  fine  and  sends  ofer  wceteres 
hrycg  ealde  madman.  The  phrase  seems  to  imply  a  sea-journey  of  some 
distance.  As  the  Wiilfinge,  the  faithful  retainers  of  Dietrich  von  Bern, 
play  an  important  part  in  the  High  German  versions  of  Gothic  legend,  it 
is  likely  that  the  original  Wylftngas  should  be  thought  of  as  neighbours  of  the 
Goths,  dwelling  on  the  Baltic  coast.  See  MuUenhoff,  Beovulf,  14,  90  ;  Z.f.d.A. 
xi,  282  ;  xxxm,  170  ;  Jiriczek  (2),  292.  That  the  Wylfmgas  of  the  O.E.  heroic 
verse  are  the  same  as  the  Wiilfinge  of  the  Heldenbuch  is  the  more  likely 
because  in  both  cases  members  of  the  family  form  their  names  by  compounds 
in  heafto-  ;  e.g.  Heaftolaf,  Hadubrant  (Binz  in  P.B.B.  xx,  216) ;  see  also  the 
preceding  note  on  Helm.  Traces  of  the  name  are  to  be  found  in  England: 
Wolfinges  law,  Wylfingaford.  The  Ylfingar  occur  in  Scandinavian  poetry: 
Helgi  Hundingsbane  is  called  "the  son  of  the  Wolfings"  Ylfinga  raft.  Cf. 
Bugge,  H.D.  84-87  ;  164-166 ;  313-314 ;  see  also  Symons  in  P.B.B.  iv,  176 ; 
and,  for  some  further  notes  on  the  Wolfings,  and  on  Helm,  Sarrazin  in  Engl. 
Stud,  xxm,  228 :  Heinzel,  Hervararsaga  in  W.S.B.  cxiv,  510. 

30.  Wald.  Wald  is  regarded  by  Miillenhoff  as  an  epic  fiction,  the  typical 
name  of  a  tyrant  (Z.f.d.A.  xi,  283). 

Woingum.  In  Nordalb.  Stud,  i,  158,  Miillenhoff  suggested  a  connection 
between  the  Woingas  [primitive  form  *Wanh-~\  and  the  island  of  Wangeroge, 
and  the  district  Wangerland,  the  older  Wangia  or  Wanga.  (See  the  Chronicon 
Moissiacense  and  the  Vita  S.  Willehadi  in  Pertz  (fol.)  SS.  n,  257  and  383.) 
They  would  therefore  be  the  inhabitants  of  the  coast  of  East  Friesland  and 
Oldenburg.  In  his  later  commentary  (Z.f.d.A.  xi,  283)  Miillenhoff  proposed  to 
take  the  name  of  the  Woingas  as  an  epic  fiction,  as  well  as  that  of  their  king:  a 
typical  name  for  an  evil  people,  from  woh  "crooked,"  "evil."  This  last 
explanation  seems  less  satisfactory.  Miillenhoff's  further  development  of  it 
(Z.f.d.A.  xxni,  124),  in  which  he  attempts  to  connect  Wald  and  his  Woings 
with  the  family  of  the  tyrant  Siggeir  of  the  Vglsunga  Saga,  wants  evidence  to 
support  it. 

Wod.  Here  again  Miillenhoff  suggests  that  the  name  is  fictitious  and 
chosen  with  reference  to  the  Thuringians,  over  whom  Wod  (i.e.  mad)  rules: 
(there  was  a  popular  etymology  which  connected  Thuringian  with  thor  "  fool  "). 
But  see  Grimm,  G.D.S.  597. 

For  the  Wod  of  Germanic  mythology  (O.N.  OSr,  the  husband  of  Freyja, 
Hyndloljofi,  Vglospd),  see  Golther,  283  etc.  We  cannot  say  whether  Wod  of 
the  Thuringians  has  any  connection  with  him. 

pyringum.  The  pyringas  may  be  the  Thoringi  of  Gregory  of  Tours  (Hist. 
Franc,  n,  9)  who  dwelt  in  the  present  Zeeland  and  North  Brabant,  in  the  neigh 
bourhood  of  Dordrecht,  at  the  mouths  of  the  Bhine  and  Maas.  These  Holier 
(V.E.  16)  identifies  with  the  Turii  or  Sturii  who  are  mentioned  by  Pliny  as 
occupying  the  same  territory.  (Nat.  Hist,  iv,  cap.  15  [29].)  These  Thuringians 


Text  (It.  30,  31)  199 

31  SseferS  Sycgum,         Sweom  Ongenctyeow, 

were  apparently  a  Frankish  people,  who  were  subsequently  pressed  South 
and  East  by  the  Saxons  and  Frisians.  It  was  Hermann  Miiller  (Der  Lex  Salica 
u.  der  Lex  Angliorum  et  Werinorum  Alter  u.  Heimat,  Wiirzburg,  1840,  p.  122 
etc.)  who  first  pointed  out  the  existence  of  these  Thoringi,  and  the  necessity 
of  distinguishing  them  from  the  Thuringians  proper ;  cf.  Waitz,  Das  alte  Recht 
der  Salischen  Franken,  Kiel  1846  ;  Grimm,  G.D.S.  601 ;  Moller  (A.f.d.A.  xxn, 
152)  ;  Erdmann  (28).  As  we  are  dealing  here  with  North  Sea  peoples  and 
heroes,  it  is  probably  these  Ehenish  Thuringians  who  are  meant  (cf.  Mullenhoff 
in  Nordalb.  Stud,  i,  159).  It  is  possible,  however,  that  here  as  in  Alfred's 
Orosius  (ed.  Sweet,  1883,  p.  16)  pyringas  means  the  main  stock  of  the  Thurin 
gians,  identical  with  the  Hermun-Duri  of  classical  times,  whose  name  is  in  the 
fifth  century  replaced  by  that  of  Thuringian  :  (the  Thuringians,  however,  cover 
a  wider  area,  from  the  Harz  mountains  to  the  Danube).  The  Thuringian  king 
dom  was  overthrown  by  Theodoric,  king  of  the  Franks  (cf.  1.  24)  in  531-6.  See 
Zeuss  (353  etc.)  ;  Bremer  in  Pauls  Grdr.  (2)  in,  938  etc. ;  Grimm,  G.D.S. 
596-607  ;  Seelmann  (Nordthttringen)  in  the  J.d.V.f.n.S.  1886,  12. 

31.  Scefer%.  Identical  with  the  SigeferS,  Secgena  lead  of  Fin.  1.  42.  For  the 
confusion  of  See  and  Sige,  cf.  Scsberht,  king  of  the  East  Saxons,  who  appears  as 
Saberchtus  or  Saeberchtus  in  the  text  of  Bede,  but  as  Sigberchtus  (at  any  rate  in 
certain  MSS.)  in  the  Chronological  Summary  (cf.  Moller,  V.E.  87).  The  name 
SigeferS  is  common  in  England,  and  so,  to  a  less  degree,  is  S<zferft  (Binz  in 
P.B.B.  xx,  184-5).  It  has  been  argued  by  Uhland  that  this  Sigeferth  or  Saeferth 
is  to  be  identified  with  Sigfried  (Sigurd)  the  Volsung  (Germania,  u,  357-63 ; 
Schriften,  vni,  497).  This  view  has  been  more  recently  supported  by  Golther 
(Germania,  xxxni,  474-5)  and  apparently  for  a  time  by  Mullenhoff  (see  the 
next  note).  It  seems  exceedingly  improbable,  though  it  is  difficult  to  speak 
with  certainty,  in  the  absence  of  sufficient  evidence  as  to  the  Sigfried  story 
in  England. 

Sycgum.  Koegel  (Ltg.  i,  1,  164)  and  Moller  (V.E.  86)  connect  the  Secgan 
with  the  Saxons  "  for  Secga  like  Sahso  signifies  swordsman  "  (Koegel).  Secgan 
and  Seaxan  would  then  be  related  as  secg,  "sword"  (Beowulf,  684)  and  seax 
"knife,"  from  Prim.  Germ,  sag-,  sahs-  (cf.  Lat.  secare).  These  Secgan  Moller 
supposes  to  have  dwelt  between  the  Elbe  and  the  Eider,  and  to  be  identical 
with  the  tribe  who  colonized  Essex.  The  evidence  for  this,  however,  is  not  con 
vincing,  and  turns  chiefly  upon  the  occurrence  of  the  names  Gesecg  and  Antsecg 
in  the  Essex  genealogy,  together  with  Seaxnete,  the  son  of  Woden,  with  whom 
the  genealogy  begins.  (See  genealogies  in  Florence  of  Worcester,  ed.  Thorpe  for 
English  Historical  Society,  1848,  i,  250 ;  and  Henry  of  Huntingdon,  Historice 
Anglorum,  u,  §  19,  ed.  Arnold,  Bolls  Series,  p.  49.)  Mullenhoff  (Nordalb.  Stud. 
i,  164)  had  drawn  attention  to  Gesecg  and  Antsecg :  he  suggested  an  identifi 
cation  of  the  Secgan  with  the  Beudigni  of  Tacitus.  All  this  is  exceedingly 
hypothetical,  but  it  seems  likely,  from  the  context  in  which  they  are  mentioned 
here,  in  1.  62,  and  in  the  Finnesburh  fragment,  that  the  Secgan  were  a  coast 
tribe.  Uhland,  having  identified  Sigeferth  with  Sigfried,  had  to  identify  the 
Secgan  with  his  people,  deriving  the  name  from  Sigi,  who  in  the  Vglsunga  Saga 
stands  at  the  head  of  the  family  [precisely  as  the  Danes  are  called  Scyldings 
because  Scyld  is  the  first  of  their  royal  house].  This  identification  was  rejected 
by  Mullenhoff  in  1859  (Z.f.d.A.  xi,  283)  but  accepted  by  him  in  1877  (Z.f.d.A. 
xxni,  117-124),  although  with  a  full  recognition  of  the  etymological  difficulty 
of  bringing  Secgan  and  Sigi  together  (155-7).  Finally,  however,  Mullenhoff 
recognized  this  identification  as  unlikely  (Beovulf,  97)  whilst  at  the  same  time 
rejecting  Moller's  explanation. 

Lappenberg  (177)  suggests  a  connection  with  the  SiyotiXuves  (recorded  by 
Ptolemy  in  the  Cimbric  Chersonese,  next  to  the  Saxons).  Geographically 
this  is  satisfactory,  but  linguistically  the  gap  is  too  great,  as  corresponding  to 
Secgan  we  should  expect  Sagiones. 

For  Secgum  :  Sycgum,  see  Moller,  V.E.  153-4. 

Sweom.  The  Swedes.  The  name  however  at  this  date  embraces  only  a  small 
section  of  the  inhabitants  of  modern  Sweden,  which  was  held  by  Finns  in  the 


200  Widsitk 

yi  Sceafthere  Ymbrum,         Sceafa  Longbeardura, 

North,  Norwegians  in  the  West,  Geatas  and  Danes  in  the  South.  See  note  to 
p.  72.  Moller  (V.E.  15)  considers  that  the  name  of  the  Swedes  is  substituted 
here  for  that  of  some  other  tribe  beginning  with  S — Sweordwerum,  Sweardum, 
or  Seaxum — on  the  ground  that  the  transition  from  tribes  at  the  mouth  of 
the  Elbe  to  the  Swedes  is  too  sudden.  But  it  does  not  follow,  because  the 
names  in  Widsith  are  usually  grouped  geographically,  that  they  must  always 
be  so. 

Ongend\>eow.  The  king  of  Sweden,  frequently  mentioned  in  Beowulf  (2476, 
etc. :  2923,  etc.).  The  name  Ongen]>eow  is  unknown  in  England  in  historical 
times,  nor  is  any  tradition  of  him  retained,  beyond  the  references  in  Beowulf 
and  in  Widsith.  A  reminiscence  of  the  name  is  to  be  found  in  the  fact  that  the 
son  of  Offa  I,  called  AngeVpeow  in  the  Chronicle,  is  called  Ongen  in  the  Historia 
Brittonum  (in  M.G.H.  p.  203).  Moller  (V.E.  19)  regards  the  name  here  as  an 
interpolation — but  the  reasons  brought  forward  are  insufficient.  Ettmuller  (t)  (2) 
and  Grein  read  Ongerfyeow,  to  bring  the  name  into  line  with  the  forms  used  in 
Beowulf. 

For  the  story  of  Ongenthew,  which  is  clearly  in  great  part  historic,  see 
H.  Weyhe,  Konig  Ongentheows  Fall,  in  Engl.  Stud,  xxxix,  14-39 ;  Gering,  115, 
note,  118  ;  Bugge  in  P.B.B.  xn,  16. 

32.  Sceafthere.  Possibly,  like  Helm,  Scild,  or  Msc,  a  typical  name  for  a 
war-king  (Miillenhoff  in  Z.f.d.A.  xi,  283 ;  cf.  also  vn,  414). 

Ymbrum.  Perhaps  the  inhabitants  of  the  island  Fehmarn  and  the  adjoining 
coast.  Fehmarn  is  repeatedly  called  Ymbria,  Imbra  in  Danish  chronicles 
and  documents  (see  Langebek,  passim),  as  also  by  Adam  of  Bremen  (Pertz  (fol.), 
SS.  vn,  373,  where  compare  the  note).  This  suggestion  was  originally  made 
by  Lappenberg  (p.  177),  and  has  been  again  made  independently  by  Siebs 
(Eng.  Fr.  Sprache,  17).  It  is  the  best  explanation  of  the  name. 

But  Thorpe  (Cod.  Ex.  516)  and,  apparently  independently,  Miillenhoff 
(Nordalb.  Stud,  i,  159  ;  cf.  also  Z.f.d.A.  xi,  283)  would  connect  the  Ymbre  with 
the  district  of  Ammerland,  west  of  the  Weser,  known  in  the  llth  century  as 
Ammeri  or  Ambria  (see  Staphorst,  Historia  Ecclesia  Hamburgensis  Diplomatica, 
Hamburg,  1723,  i,  425,  and  i,  603,  where  in  a  charter  of  ?  1199  we  have  comes 
Elimer  Ambria  ;  see  also  Ledebur,  Die  filnf  Miinsterschen  Gaue  und  die  sieben 
Seelande  Frieslands,  Berlin,  1836,  especially  map  at  end:  and  H.  Bottger, 
Diocesan  u.  Gaugrenzen  Norddeutschlands,  Halle,  1875-6,  n,  161).  Perhaps, 
also,  the  name  is  preserved  in  Amrum,  one  of  the  North  Frisian  islands. 
Cf.  also  Ettmiiller(i)  18;  Much,  101. 

It  may  be  that  in  these  two  names  Ambria,  Amrum  we  have  traces  of 
fragments  of  the  famous  tribe  of  the  Ambrones,  for  whom  see  Lappenberg, 
i,  101-2;  Zeuss,  147-150;  Miillenhoff,  D.A.  n,  114,  118,  Beovulf,  95.  The 
Ambrones  are  mentioned  by  Plutarch  as  taking  part  in  the  expedition  of  the 
Cimbri  and  Teutones  (ed.  Reiske,  Lipsise,  1775,  n,  830,  Life  of  Marius,  Teirrom 
d£  Kal'An^puves  tyalvovro  ir\-f)dei  T  &ireipoi  xa.1  dvffirp6ff(airoi  ra  ef&ri).  They  seem, 
in  fact,  to  have  early  got  a  bad  name,  and  the  word  Ambrones,  as  is  clear  from 
the  many  instances  quoted  by  Miillenhoff,  is  often  used  simply  as  a  synonym 
for  robbers. 

There  is  some  evidence,  though  far  from  conclusive,  that  a  section  of  the 
Ambrones  took  part  in  the  colonization  of  England.  Siebs  (Eng.  Fries.  Sp.  15, 
16)  sees  many  traces  of  their  name  in  ancient  Wessex  (Worcestershire  and 
Wiltshire)  :  and  the  close  connection  which  many  students  have  seen  between 
the  North  Frisian  dialect  of  Amrum  and  Old  English  might  also  be  urged 
in  support  (cf.  Moller  in  A.f.d.A.  xxn,  157).  The  heavy  evidence  for  a  settle 
ment  of  Ambrones  in  England  is  that  the  Historia  Brittonum,  describing  the 
baptism  of  the  Deirans  (more  correctly  the  Bernicians,  as  Ten  Brink  has 
pointed  out,  referring  to  Bede,  H.E.  n,  14),  calls  them  Ambrones  :  et  per  quad- 
raginta  dies  non  cessavit  baptizare  omne  genus  Ambronum,  where  a  13th  century 
MS.  (Corp.  Christ.  Camb.  139)  records  the  gloss  id  est  Ald-Saxonum.  See 
Nennius,  ed.  Stevenson,  Eng.  Hist.  Soc.  1838,  §  63 ;  Moller,  V.E.  89  ;  Ten 
Brink,  Beowulf,  198-9. 


Text  (tt.  32,  33)  201 

33  Htin  Hsetwerum         ond  Holen  Wrosnum. 

Perhaps,  however,  the  use  of  the  term  in  the  Historia  Brittonum  is  not 
ethnographical  at  all,  but  expresses  the  previous  unregenerate  state  of  the 
converts :  the  gloss  may  then  be  the  conjecture  of  some  scribe  who  did  not 
understand  this;  or,  as  Chadwick  suggests  (56),  Ambronum  may  be  an  error 
for  Umbronum,  men  of  the  Humber.  (Cf.  also  Latham's  Germania,  1851, 
cvin.) 

Mullenhoff's  connection  of  the  Ymbre  with  Ambria  has  been  generally 
followed  (e.g.  by  Bieger  in  Z.f.d.A.  xi,  202-4),  but  Lappenberg's  identification 
with  Imbria  is  far  more  satisfactory.  Whether  there  is  a  connection  between 
any  or  all  of  the  names  Ambria,  Amrum,  Imbria  and  the  classical  Ambrones 
cannot  be  decided  with  certainty,  but  such  connection  is  very  probable.  The 
differences  of  vowel  would  presumably  be  due  to  ablaut  (Much  in  Hoops 
Beallexikon,  77). 

Sceafa.  Binz,  following  Moller,  would  read  here  Scyld,  or  Scefing  (P.B.B.  xx, 
148).  He  continues  "  Sceafa  ist  iibrigens  auch  wegen  der  schwachen  form  sehr 
verdachtig."  But  strong  and  weak  forms  of  the  proper  noun  interchange  not 
infrequently.  Thus  we  have  Sceldwea,  Sceldwa  in  the  Parker  MS.  of  the 
Chronicle  (sub  anna  855),  in  Asser,  and  in  Florence  of  Worcester,  as  against 
Scyld  in  Beowulf,  Ethelwerd,  etc. :  Geat  in  the  Parker  and  most  MSB.  of  the 
Chronicle  against  Geata  in  MS.  Cot.  Tib.  A.  6,  in  Asser,  and  in  the  text  of 
Florence  of  Worcester  (r,  p.  71,  ed.  Thorpe,  1848),  who,  however,  writes  Geat 
elsewhere :  Beowan  ham  in  the  charter  of  931  (Birch,  Cart.  Sax.  n,  677, 
Kemble,  C.  D.  n,  353)  as  against  Beaw  in  the  Parker  MS.  :  Hreftles  [MS.  Hradles, 
Beowulf,  1485]  as  against  Hreftlan  [MS.  Hrcedlan,  454] :  Hors  in  the  Historia 
Brittonum,  §  31,  against  the  more  usual  Horsa.  Some  O.H.G.  parallels  will  be 
found  in  Z.f.d.A.  xn,  260.  There  seems  then  no  reason  for  doubting  the 
identity  of  Sceaf  and  Sceafa,  or  for  regarding  Sceafa  as  a  shortened  form  of  a 
compound  name  with  two  elements  (parallel  to  CuJ>a  for  Cu\>wine)  as  suggested 
by  Chadwick  (282). 

See  also  Koegel  in  Z.f.d.A.  xxxvn,  270 :  Mullenhoff  in  Z.f.d.A.  vn,  410 : 
Heusler  in  A.f.d.A.  xxx,  31. 

Longbeardum.  The  context  in  which  the  Lombards  are  here  mentioned 
seems  to  point  to  their  ancient  home  between  the  Baltic  and  the  Elbe. 

The  connection  between  the  Longbeardan  and  the  Heafyobeardan  is  doubtful. 
See  below,  1.  49. 

33.  Hun.  The  name  of  this  chief  is  to  be  found  in  Beowulf,  if  we  construe 
11.  1143-4  with  Bugge  (P.B.B.  xn,  33),  Holder,  Ten  Brink  and  Gering  "  when 
Hun  thrust  (or  placed)  in  his  bosom  Lafing,  best  of  swords."  But  the  difficulties 
of  this  interpretation  were  demonstrated  by  Imelmann  in  the  D.L.Z.  (xxx,  999 : 
April,  1909).  Chadwick  (52)  had  drawn  attention  to  the  hero  Hunleifus  in  the 
Skioldunga  gaga.  E.  Huchon,  in  a  review  of  Chadwick  in  the  Revue  Ger- 
manique  (in,  626),  pointed  out  that,  on  the  evidence  discovered  by  Chadwick, 
Hunlafing  in  Beowulf  must  be  the  name  of  a  man.  This  was  confirmed  by 
Imelmann's  discovery  of  Hunlapus  (see  Appendix,  K).  It  may  be  therefore 
taken  as  demonstrated  that  the  name  in  Beowulf  is  Hunlafing,  not  Hun. 
Possibly  the  name  of  a  hero  Hun  is  preserved  in  the  Frisian  Hunesga  (Mullen 
hoff  in  Nordalb.  Stud,  i,  160,  Eieger  in  Z.f.d.A.  xi,  188).  The  name  Hunn 
occurs  in  the  list  of  sea-kings  in  the  Thulor  (C.P.B.  n,  422).  There  does  not 
appear  to  be  any  connection  between  Hun  of  the  Hsetwere  and  the  king  and 
champion  named  Hun  in  Saxo.  The  name  is  not  connected  with  the  racial 
name,  being  found  as  an  element  in  personal  names  before  the  arrival  of  the 
Huns  in  Europe.  (Mullenhoff  in  Z.f.d.A.  xi,  284.) 

Hcetwerum.  Leo  first  detected  the  Haetwere  in  this  passage :  Kemble  had 
read  Hun-hcet  Werum.  The  MS.  may  be  read  equally  well  either  way.  Grundtvig 
(Dannevirke,  1817,  n,  285)  had  identified  the  Hetware  of  Beowulf  with  the 
classical  Hatuarii :  an  identification  which  has  been  universally  accepted.  See 
Grimm,  DM.  xxn;  Zeuss,  100;  Z.f.d.A.  vi,  437  ;  Mullenhoff,  Beovulf,  17,  18, 
94  ;  Brerner  in  Pauls  Grdr.  (2)  in,  894. 

The  Hatuarii  were  a  Frankish  people  dwelling  on  the  Rhine,  near  its  mouth. 


202  Widsith 

Hringweald  wees  haten         Herefarena  cyning. 
35  Offa  weold  Ongle,         Alewih  Denura  : 

Ofia  ruled  Angel,  Alewih  the  Danes :  he  was  boldest  of  all  these  men, 

Zeuss  would  identify  them  with  the  Batavi  of  Tacitus,  who  were  a  branch  of  the 
Chatti  (Germ,  xxix),  but  apparently  the  Hatuarii  dwelt  between  the  Rhine  and 
the  Zuider  Zee,  whilst  the  Batavi  dwelt  south  of  them.  They  are  first  mentioned 
as  having  submitted  to  Tiberius  with  other  tribes  of  the  lower  Ehine  (Vellejus, 
ii,  105  ;  subacti  Canninefates,  Attuarii,  Bructeri).  Subsequently  they  spread 
somewhat  higher  up  the  Rhine,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Cleves,  where  they 
were  attacked  by  Hygelac  in  the  sixth  century,  and  overthrew  him.  (Beowulf, 
2363,  2916  ;  Gregory  of  Tours,  Hist.  Franc,  m,  3. )  This  district  appears  to  be 
designated  by  the  O.N.  Hunaland  ;  and  Sigfrid,  who  in  the  Nibelungen  Lied  is 
connected  with  it,  is  called  inn  hunski  in  the  Edda  (cf.  Kaufmann  in  Z.f.d.Ph. 
XL,  283-4).  There  may  possibly  be  some  connection  between  these  terms  and 
the  traditional  king  Hun  of  the  Hastware. 

Holen.  Miillenhoff  (Nordalb.  Stud,  i,  160)  interpreted  "elder-tree,"  com 
paring  for  the  naming  of  a  hero  from  a  tree  the  hero  Assi  in  Lombard  story  [cf. 
O.E.  JEsc]:  and  for  the  sacredness  of  the  elder  comparing  Grimm,  DM.  374 
(trans.  Stallybrass,  n,  651).  Later  he  interprets  it  as  a  fictitious  king's  name, 
"Holm-oak,"  emphasizing  the  idea  of  immemorial  age  (Z.f.d.A.  xi,  284)  and 
compares  O.H.G.  hulis  (modern  hulst)  used  as  a  proper  name.  Neither  of  these 
explanations  is  satisfactory,  as  the  elder  (Germ,  holunder)  is  surely  quite 
distinct  from  the  holly  (O.E.  holen) ;  and  it  seems  unlikely  that  O.E.  holen 
can  mean  "  holm-oak." 

Bugge  (P.  B.B.  xii,  78)  would  identify  Holen  with  the  Holdinus  rex  Rutenorum 
who  is  mentioned  by  Geoffrey  of  Monmouth  as  one  of  Arthur's  barons  (x.  6  : 
x.  9).  But  this  seems  far-fetched. 

Wrosnum.  Mullenhoff  (Nordalb.  Stud,  i,  161)  compares  the  Rosogavi  whose 
inhabitants  were  rooted  out  by  Charles  the  Great  in  804.  Et  delude  misit  im- 
perator  scaras  suas  in  Wimodia  et  in  Hostingabi  et  in  Rosogavi,  ut  illam  gentern 
foras  patriam  transduceret.  Chronicon  Moissiacense,  in  Pertz  (fol.)  SS.  i,  307. 
See  also  Bottger,  Gaugrenzen  Norddeutschlands,  1875-6,  n,  144. 

The  people  seem  to  have  been  coast  tribes,  dwelling  between  the  Weser  and 
the  Elbe,  but  nearer  the  latter.  They  would  be  close  neighbours,  if  Mullenhoff's 
conjectures  are  right,  to  the  Woingas  and  the  Ymbras,  and  not  far  removed 
from  the  old  home  of  the  Lombards  (Bardengau)  or  from  Ymbria  (Fehmarn). 
The  identification  is  therefore  plausible,  in  view  of  the  context. 

Lappenberg's  attempt  (p.  176)  to  identify  the  Wrosnas  with  the  Scandinavian 
tribe  who  gave  their  name  to  Russia  is,  of  course,  chronologically  and  phoneti 
cally  impossible  ;  cf.  Ettmiiller  d)  19. 

34.  Hringweald,  Herefarena  cyning.      Possibly,   as   Miillenhoff    supposes 
(Z.f.d.A.  xi,  284),  "epic  fictions";  typical  names  for  a  treasure-giving  king 
and  his  conquering  people. 

Herefaran  simply  means  the  warriors  or  pirates.  Mullenhoff  (Nordalb. 
Stud,  i,  161)  compares  Lindesfaran  :  a  band  of  sea-rovers  who  gave  their  name 
to  Lindisfarne.  Moller  (V.E.  90,  91)  builds  an  elaborate  theory  on  these  similar 
names,  connecting  the  Lindesfaran  or  Herefaran,  their  king  Hringweald,  and 
their  Holy  Island  off  the  coast  of  Northumberland,  with  Heligoland,  and  the 
neighbouring  island  of  Sylt,  where  traditions  of  a  king  Ring  remain. 

35.  Offa.    See  Introduction.   Mullenhoff  (Nordalb.  Stud,  i,  162)  regards  these 
lines  (35-49)  as  interpolated,  although  at  an  exceedingly  early  date.    They  do  not 
suit  the  context,  and  the  praise  of  Offa,  the  foe  of  the  Myrgingas,  does  not  suit 
a  Myrging  minstrel.     Mullenhoff's  other  reason  is  that  the  historic  Offa  lived  in 
the  sixth  century,  and  therefore  too  late  to  have  appeared  as  a  hero  of  song 
in  the  original  Widsith.    This  last  argument  is  certainly  wrong  (see  Mullenhoff, 
Beovulf,  85,  86).     Later  (Z.f.d.A.  xi,  294)  Mullenhoff  does  not  try  to  distinguish 
this  passage,  in  date,  from  the  bulk  of  the  poem. 

Ongle.    Kemble  suggested  Onglum  ;  wrongly.     Cf.  1.  8. 


Text  (It  34-41)  203 

se  waes  bara  manna        modgast  ealra; 
nohwaebre  he  ofer  Offan         eorlscype  fremede  ; 
ac  Offa  geslog        aerest  monna 
cniht  wesende         cynerica  msest ; 
40  naenig  efeneald  him         eorlscipe  maran 
on  orette        ane  sweorde  : 

yet  did  he  not  in  his  deeds  of  valour  surpass  Offa.  But  Offa  gained,  first 
of  men,  by  arms  the  greatest  of  kingdoms  whilst  yet  a  boy ;  no  one  of  his 
age  [did]  greater  deeds  of  valour  in  battle  with  his  single  sword ;  he  drew 

Alewih.  Unknown.  Thorpe  (Cod.  Ex.  517)  followed  by  Miillenhoff  (Nordalb. 
Stud,  i,  162)  identified  with  the  Olo,  king  of  Denmark,  frequently  mentioned  by 
Saxo  (Books  vn,  vin).  But  the  names  do  not  correspond  phonetically,  and 
Miillenhoff  subsequently  gave  up  this  explanation,  suggesting  another  in  his 
Beovulf,  53.  The  name  occurs  in  England  in  the  Mercian  pedigree  (A.S. 
Chronicle,  Parker  MS.  sub  anno  716)  Alweo  Sawing,  &  nephew  of  the  great 
Penda.  Binz  supposes  the  fact  of  a  descendant  of  Offa  having  been  named 
Alweo  to  point  to  the  survival  of  a  tradition  in  which  the  two  kings  were 
connected.  Elsewhere  the  name  occurs  rarely  in  England  and  always  north  of 
the  Thames,  on  Anglian  soil  (P.B.B.  xx,  169).  The  name  is  also  fairly  common 
in  continental  Germany ;  see  instances  in  Forstemann,  54,  76 ;  Alawig, 
Alahwih.  The  O.N.  form  is  Qlvfr  (Kluge,  Engl.  Stud,  xxi,  447). 

37.  nohwafre  he  ofer  Offan  eorlscype  fremede.    It  has  generally  been  assumed 
that  this  means  "  Alewih  could  not  exercise  dominion  over  Offa "  and  that 
it  points  to  a  struggle  between  the  two  kings.     (Miillenhoff,  Nordalb.   Stud. 
i,  162;   Beovulf,   74;   Moller,   V.E.    30.)     Eorlscype=(l)  deed  of  valour,  (2) 
dominion,  authority.     The  latter  sense,  however,  is  the  rarer,  and  the  phrase 
Jremman  or  cefnan  eorlscype   seems  always  to  mean    "  to  perform   deeds  of 
valour"  ;  e.g.  in  Beowulf,  2622,  where  it  cannot  mean  to  exercise  dominion,  as 
Wiglaf  is  not  a  prince.    Ofer  may  be  [to  rule]  "  over  "  as  in  rice  ofer  heofonstolas 
"mighty  over  the  thrones  of  heaven"  (Genesis,  8)  or  "than,"  as  loseph  was 
gleawra  ofer  hi  ealle  (Orosius,  34,  1).     The  rendering  given  above  (which  is  the 
one  adopted  by  Koegel,  Ltg.  i,  1,  159)  is  therefore  the  more  probable,  though 
both  are  grammatically  possible.     Bosworth-Toller  gives  both  renderings,  the 
one  under  onorettan,  the  other  under  eorlscype.    For  ofer  cf.  F.  Wuflen  in 
Anglia,  xxxiv,  esp.  p.  448. 

The  allusion  does  not  therefore  necessarily  point  to  any  contest  between 
Danes  and  Angles. 

38.  geslog  "gained  by  striking,"  as  in  the  Brunanburg  poem  ealdorlangne 
tir  geslogon  <et  scecce  :   so  in  Beowulf  (459)  gesloh  means  "settled  by  blows." 
Cf.  Miillenhoff,  Beovulf,  74.     Not  "  he  smote  the  greatest  of  kingdoms,"  viz. 
Denmark,  as  taken  by  Moller  (V.E.  31). 

39.  cniht  wesende ..  ,n<enig  efeneald.     But  in  both  English  and  Danish  story 
Offa  had  reached  the  age  of  thirty  before  his  combat.    Mutus  autem  et  verba 
humana  non  proferens  usque  ad  annum  cetatis  sues  tricesimum  ;  De  Offa  primo  in 
Matthaei  Paris  Historia,  ed.  Wats,  1640.     Qvi  usqve  ad  tricesimum  cetatis  suee 
annum  fandi  possibilitatem  cohibuit,  Sweyn  in  Langebek,  i,  45  ;   and  cf.  the 
extract  from  the  Annales  Ryenses  quoted  on  p.  87  (footnote). 

Miillenhoff  (Sagen,  Mdrchen  u.  Lieder  der  Herzogthiimer  Schleswig-Holstein 
u.  Lauenburg,  p.  4)  supposed  that  "thirty"  was  a  blunder  for  "thirteen": 
Chadwick  (129)  more  plausibly  suggests  that  such  a  phrase  as  }>ritig  missera 
may  have  been  misunderstood  as  thirty  years.  But  the  extraordinary  thing 
is  that  the  Danish  and  the  English  traditions  should  later  agree  in  a  common 
error. 

41.  on  orette.  Thorpe  (Cod.  Ex.  and  Beowulf),  Grein  and  Bosworth-Toller 
suggest -that  this  should  be  read  as  one  word  onorettan,  to  accomplish,  a  word 


204  Widsitk 

42  merce  gemserde         wiS  Myrgingura 
bi  Fifeldore :         heoldon  for?5  si]7)>an 
Engle  ond  Swaefe,         swa  hit  Offa  geslog. 

the  boundary  against  the  Myrgingas  at  Fifeldor.  Engle  and  Swsefe  held 
it  afterwards  as  Offa  struck  it  out. 

which,  if  we  adopt  the  reading  of  Dietrich,  Grein  d)  and  Qrein-Wiilcker,  is  also 
found  in  Exod.  312-3  :  Judisc  fefta  an  onorette  uncuft  gelad,  "  alone  the  folk  of 
Judah  accomplished  the  strange  path." 

Although  the  editors  have  always  read  the  MS.  on  orette,  this  might  rather  be 
read  as  one  word  :  hut  little  importance  can  be  attached  to  the  spacing  of  the 
MS.  Kenible  adopted  on  orette,  which  his  punctuation  shows  that  he  took  as  an 
adverbial  phrase  "in  battle"  going  with  gemaerde.  Ettmuller  d)  (2)  suggested 
cefnde  on  orette,  "accomplished  in  battle":  so  Ebeling,  Klipstein,  Sedg.;  Leo, 
Grein  (Sprachschatz),  Bieger,  Gr.-Wiilcker  and  Kluge  also  have  on  orette, 
though  Leo,  Grein  and  Kieger  certainly  regarded  orette  as  a  verb  (and  con 
nected  with  georfttan,  orrettan ;  which  however  means  "  to  confound").  I  follow 
Kemble  in  the  interpretation  of  on  orette,  and,  with  Bieger,  make  the  pause 
after  sweorde. 

oret  is  from  *or-hat,  a  calling  out,  challenging :  cf.  O.H.G.  urheiz. 

ane  sweorde.  "  Einzig  mit  dem  schwerte,  d.  h.  wohl  durch  zweikampf," 
Miillenhoff,  Beovulf,  74.  So  Koegel,  "  allein  mit  dem  Schwerte  stellte  er  die 
Grenze  fest,"  Ltg.  i,  1,  159.  "  With  single  sword  he  spread  his  borders, 
against  the  Myrgings  marked  the  bound,"  Gummere  in  M.L.N.  iv,  420. 

42.  merce.    mearce  K  (2),  Ettmiiller  d)  (2) ;  mcerce,  Leo. 

gemcerde.  Fixed  (not  as  Thorpe  or  Gummere  take  it  "  enlarged,"  "  spread  " 
from  mdra  but)  from  gemsere  boundary.  Cf.  lehtes  singal  tido  gelimplicum 
gimaerende,  translating  lucis  diurna  tempora,  successibus  diterminans — Kituale 
Ecclesice  Dunelmensis,  1840,  p.  164. 

43.  Fifeldor.    The  combat,  according  to  Saxo,  took  place  on  an  island  of 
the  river  Eider  (ed.  Holder,   iv,  115  ;  xn,   402).     The  Eider  is  the  Egidora, 
JEgidora  in  the  Prankish  annalists  of  the  9th  century  (see  Pertz  (fol.)  SS.  i, 
Einhardi   Annales,   808,  811,  815,  828 ;   Annales  Fuldenses,  815,  857,  873)  ; 
jffigisdyr  in  the  Old  Norse  (Jomsvikinga  Saga,  8,  9).     O.N.  JEgir  signifies  both 
the  sea  and  the  sea  divinity,  who  was  remembered  in  England  till  modern 
times:  he  is  the  "monster  Agar  "  of  Lyly's  Gallathea,  and  "eager"  is  still 
used  for  the  sea  wave  or  bore  of  rivers.     The  O.E.  is  Egor  (Eagor),  which  is 
synonymous  and  interchangeable  with  Fifel :  eagorstream  (sea),  Andreas,  441 ; 
egorstream,  Boethius,  Metra,  xx,  118;   egor-here  (deluge),  Genesis,  1402,  1537, 
alternate  with  Jifel-stream,  Boethius,  Metra,   xxvi,  26  ;  fifelwceg,  Elene,  237. 
Egordor  and  Fifeldor  alike  mean  the  mouth  where  the  river  opens  on  the  dread 
sea.     This  interchange  of  synonyms  in  a  place  name,  although  it  is  certainly 
rare,  can  be  paralleled  from  the  same  passages  in  the  Jomsvikinga  Saga  where  the 
Eider  is  mentioned  :  the  mouth  of  the  Schlei  being  first  called  "  mouth  "  and 
then  "  door"  (millom  jEgisdura  ok  Slesmynna,  cap.  8  ;  Haraldr  konungr  fer  til 
jEgisdyra,  en  Hdkon  jarl  fer  til  Slesdora,  cap.  9 ;  Fornmanna  Sogur,  xi  (1828), 
pp.  28,  31.     See  Seelmann,  Die  Bewohner  Danemarks  vor  dem  Eindringen  der 
Danen,  in  the  J.d.V.f.n.S.  xn,  1886  ;  and  Bugge,  H.D.  131-2). 

Lastly,  in  the  Chronicle  of  Dietmar,  the  Eider  is  called  Wieglesdor,  which  is 
best  explained  as  a  corruption  of  Fiflesdor  (Thietmari  Ghronicon,  recog. 
F.  Kurze,  Hannoverse,  1889,  in,  6  (4),  p.  51). 

There  would  therefore,  even  apart  from  Saxo,  be  no  difficulty  in  identifying 
Fifeldor  with  the  Eider :  and,  since  Saxo  definitely  places  Offa's  combat  on 
that  river,  it  seems  carrying  scepticism  far  to  doubt  the  certainty  of  the  identi 
fication,  as  is  done  by  Erdmann  (p.  48),  Holthausen  and  Siebs. 

See  also  Grimm,  D.M.  1835,  147,  197  ;  Leo,  79.  Bieger  in  Germania,  in, 
173  would  connect  Egidora,  Fifeldor,  with  the  Germanic  idea  of  hell. 

44.  Swcefe.    How  do  the  Swsefe  come  in  ?    The  contending  parties  are  the 


Text  (U.  42-49)  205 

45  HroJ?wulf  ond  HroSgar        heoldon  lengest 
35  b  sibbe  IJaetsomne         suhtorfaedran, 

sij?ban  hy  forwraecon         Wicinga  cynn 

ond  Ingeldes         ord  forbigdan, 

forheowan  set  Heorote         HeaSo-Beardna  J?rym. 

For  a  very  long  time  did  Hrothwulf  and  Hrothgar  keep  the  peace 
together,  uncle  and  nephew,  after  they  had  driven  away  the  race  of  the 
Vikings  and  humbled  the  array  of  Ingeld,  hewed  down  at  Heorot  the 
host  of  the  Heathobards. 

Angles  and  the  Myrgingas.  Therefore  we  must  either  (1)  suppose  that  the 
Myrgingas  and  Swrafe  are  here  the  same  people,  the  Myrgingas  counting  as 
one  branch  of  the  wide-spread  Suevic  stock.  (Miillenhoff,  Beovulf,  99-103  ; 
Moller,  V.E.  26.)  Moller  points  to  the  name  Schwabsted  on  the  Trene,  in 
SchJeswig,  as  a  proof  that  the  Suevic  family  extended  to  the  borders  of  the 
Angles ;  also  the  grouping  of  Engle  and  Sweefe  together  in  1.  60  supports 
the  idea  that  these  races  were  neighbours.  The  fact  that  in  11.  23,  24  the 
Swaefe  are  differentiated  from  the  Myrgingas  does  not  render  this  explanation 
impossible ;  we  have  seen  that  the  term  Swaefe  from  the  time  of  Csssar  and 
Tacitus  has  a  broader  and  a  narrower  signification.  Or  we  may  (2)  take  Sweefe 
as  a  section  of  the  Suevic  tribe,  isolated  and  settled  around  Schwabsted.  Offa 
perhaps  rules  both  the  Angles  and  this  small  tribe  of  Swabians  :  they  are 
bracketed  together  and  opposed  to  the  Myrgingas.  This,  certainly  less  plausible 
theory,  is  supported  by  Koegel  (Ltg.  i,  160)  and  Seelmann  (p.  57).  (3)  Rejecting 
altogether  the  usual  interpretation  of  Myrgingas  as  "people  of  Manrungani," 
Much  (P.B.B,  xvn,  193)  would  regard  the  name  as  synonymous  with  Saxon,  and 
would  accordingly  substitute  Seaxan  here  for  Sweefe.  This  view  derives  some 
little  support  from  Saxo  Grammaticus,  who  makes  the  opponents  of  Offa 
Saxons,  but  the  conjecture  is  an  improbable  one. 

Of  the  three  theories  (1)  seems  to  present  us  with  the  fewest  difficulties. 

45.     Hro]>wulf,  Hroftgar,  Ingeld.     See  Introduction,  pp.  79-84. 

lengest.     See  note  to  1.  28,  above. 

47.  Wicinga  cynn.  Siebs  (p.  304),  like  Maurer  earlier,  regards  this  phrase 
as  indicating  a  late  date.  Wiking  certainly  in  O.E.  comes  to  mean  a 
Scandinavian  pirate  :  but  there  is  abundant  evidence  that,  so  far  from  being 
a  Scandinavian  loan  word,  it  existed  in  the  West  Germanic  languages  before 
the  Viking  era.  See  Miillenhoff,  Beovulf,  95,  etc. ;  Bugge,  Studier  over  de 
nordiske  Glide-  og  Heltesagns  oprindelse,  i,  1881,  pp.  5,  542 ;  Much  in  P.B.B. 
xvn,  201,  etc.  ;  Sweet,  History  of  English  Sounds,  p.  90.  The  original  meaning 
seems  to  have  been  "  warrior,"  but  the  word  came  early  to  be  connected  with 
the  sea  :  cf.  stewicingas,  Exodus,  333. 

49.  Heafto-Beardna.  It  has  been  frequently  argued  that  the  true  name  of 
the  Langobardi  was  Bardi,  and  that  hence  the  Heaftobeardan  are  identical  with 
the  Lombards,  the  epithet  being  varied  precisely  as  we  get  sometimes  Dene, 
sometimes  Gar-Dene,  or  Hring-Dene.  (So  Ettmiiller  (j)  20;  Heyne's  Beowulf; 
Wiilcker,  Kl.  Dicht.  121 ;  Bremer  in  Pauls  Grdr.  (2)  in,  949.)  In  support 
of  this  has  been  urged  (1)  the  use  of  Bardi  for  Langobardi,  in  Paul  the  Deacon 
and  other  writers  in  touch  with  Lombard  tradition.  But  this  use  of  Bardi  for 
Langobardi  is  almost  limited  to  Latin  verse.  It  is  first  found  in  the  epitaph  on 
Droctulf ,  who  was  a  contemporary  of  Alboin  :  an  epitaph  obviously  written  by  a 
Roman,  not  a  Lombard  (see  SS.  Rerum  Langobardicarum  in  M.G.H.,  Hanno- 
verse,  1878,  p.  102).  The  form  Bardi  is  used  in  several  epitaphs  written  in 
much  later  times  by  Paul  the  Deacon  and  others  (see  id.  p.  22,  on  Arichis, 
apparently  by  Paul ;  p.  23  on  Paul  himself 

Eximio  dudum  Bardorum  stemmate  gentis  ; 

the  epitaph  on  Queen  Ansa,  attributed  to  Paul ;  other  epitaphs,  235,  238,  429). 
It  has  not,  I  think,  been  noted  that  Langobardi  is  a  word  quod  versu  dicere  non 


206  Widsitk 

50  Swa  ic  geondferde  fela        fremdra  londa 
In  such  wise  I  fared  through  many  strange  lands  throughout  this  wide 

est,  and  which  had  to  be  mutilated  before  it  could  be  got  into  a  hexameter.  The 
use  of  Bardi  for  Langobardi  in  verse  proves,  then,  nothing  at  all.  The  only 
early  instances  I  can  find  of  Bardus  for  Langobardus  in  prose  are  cohors  Bardica 
in  the  late  9th  century  Erchemperti  Historia  Langobardorum  Beneventanorum 
(SS.  Eer.  Lango.  262),  and  Bardan  \>one  beorh  for  the  Apennines  in  Alfred's 
Orosius  (cf.  Icel.  Munbard,  and  Mons  Bardonis  in  Otho  of  Frisingen). 

Again,  it  has  been  pointed  out  (2)  that  men  of  Bardengau  and  Bardewik  on 
the  Elbe  are  repeatedly  called  Bardi  in  the  Chronica  Sclavorum  of  Helmold  : 
but,  granting  that  these  men  of  Bardewik  were  a  remnant  of  the  old  Lombard 
stock,  it  seems  perilous  to  argue,  from  the  form  of  their  name  in  the  12th 
century,  as  to  the  form  of  the  Lombard  name,  and  consequent  Lombard 
affinities,  in  the  sixth  century.  Moreover,  it  does  not  seem  clear  how  the  Bardi 
remaining  behind  in  Bardowyk  could  have  been  neighbours  and  foes  of  the 
Danes  :  still  less  could  the  main  body  of  the  Lombards,  who  since  A.D.  168  were 
on  the  borders  of  the  Roman  Empire,  by  the  Danube.  If  then  we  are  to  equate 
the  Heathobeardan  and  the  Lombards,  we  must  adopt  the  suggestion  of  Bugge 
(H.D.  159-163)  that  a  body  of  the  Lombards  was  left  behind  on  the  Baltic  coast. 
But  there  is  nothing  to  show  that  this  was  the  case.  Any  evidence  leading  us 
to  identify  the  Heathobeardan  and  the  Langobardi  is  therefore  entirely  wanting, 
though  of  course  the  two  nations  may  have  been  originally  connected  (cf.  Binz 
in  P.B.B.  xx,  174 ;  Holler,  V.E.  29).  Miillenhoff  (Beovulf,  29,  32,  followed  by 
Much  in  P.B.B.  xvn,  201;  Heinzel,  A.f.d.A.  xvi,  271)  suggested  that  the 
Heathobeardan  are  rather  to  be  identified  with  the  Heruli  (for  whom  see  note 
to  1.  87).  Certainly  the  name  wiring  is  most  appropriate  to  the  Heruli,  who 
were  essentially  sea-robbers  :  and  they  are  the  only  people  whom  we  know 
to  have  had  a  blood  feud  with  the  Danes  in  the  early  ages.  They  were  expelled 
from  their  territory  by  the  Danes,  according  to  Jordanes.  But,  as  the  Heruli 
are  first  heard  of  ravaging  the  Roman  Empire  in  the  second  half  of  the  third 
century,  it  has  been  thought  that  their  expulsion  from  their  homes  by  the 
Danes  probably  dates  about  A.D.  250  (Bremer  in  Pauls  Grdr.  (g)  in,  834) ;  whilst 
the  wars  of  Danes  and  Heathobeardan  can  be  dated  with  some  certainty  about 
A.D.  500.  Yet  since  the  Heruli  who  are  met  with  in  the  Roman  historians 
about  the  end  of  the  fifth  and  the  early  sixth  century  are  still  heathen,  they  had 
probably  only  recently  arrived  from  the  North  (Zeuss,  479),  and  it  may  have 
been  these  sixth  century  Heruli,  rather  than  the  pirates  of  the  third  century, 
whose  influx  into  the  Empire  was  due  to  their  having  been  displaced  by  the 
Danes.  This  would  agree  well  with  the  chronology  of  Beowulf. 

It  seems  probable  that  the  Heathobeardan  are  personified  in  the  hero 
Hothbrodd  (see  Introduction,  pp.  81-2)  and  since  he  is  localized  by  the  Helgi 
lays  on  the  south  shore  of  the  Baltic,  and  since  this  suits  the  data  of  Beowulf 
and  of  Widsith  well,  we  may  perhaps  regard  this  as  the  seat  of  the  Heatho 
beardan.  More  than  this  cannot  be  said,  and  evidence  for  identification  with 
any  historic  tribe,  Langobardi  or  Heruli,  is  insufficient,  though  early  kinship 
with  the  Langobardi  is  probable  enough. 

See  also  Olrik,  Heltedigtning,  21,  22 ;  Sarrazin  in  Engl.  Stud.  XLII,  11. 

d  of  Heaftobeardna  added  in  MS.  over  line  :  cf.  the  spelling  in  Beowulf,  2037, 
2067 ;  Heaftabearna,  Heaftobearna. 

50.  Swa.  As  the  preceding  passage  has  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  poet's 
travels  we  must  either  (1)  refer  swa  to  what  follows :  I  went  through  many  strange 
lands  in  such  wise  that... etc.  (with  Miillenhoff,  Z.f.d.A.  xi,  285)  or  (2)  we  must 
suppose  that  the  logic  of  the  passage  has  been  destroyed  by  omission  or  inter 
polation  (with  Moller,  V.E.  34  ;  Langhans  Veber  den  Ursprung  der  Nordfriesen, 
Wien,  1877).  Langhans  regards  the  whole  of  11.  10-49  as  an  interpolation  and 
would  thus  connect  swa  directly  with  the  opening  lines :  "In  such  wise  (i.e.  accom 
panying  the  lady  Ealhhild)."  In  this  Langhans  may  be  right :  but  when  he 
argues  that  18-49  are  drawn  from  Beowulf,  and  from  those  parts  of  Beowulf 


Text  (II  50-58)  207 

geond  ginne  grund;        godes  ond  yfles 
J>ser  ic  cunnade         cnosle  bidaeled, 
freomaegum  feor,         folgade  wide. 
ForJ>on  ic  mseg  singan         ond  secgan  spell, 
55  msenan  fore  mengo         in  meoduhealle, 
hu  me  cynegode         cystum  dohten. 
Ic  waes  mid  Hunum         ond  mid  HreS-Gotum 
mid  Sweom  ond  mid  Geatum         ond  mid  Su]?-Denum. 

earth ;  of  good  and  evil  there  I  made  trial,  from  my  race  remote :  afar 
from  my  kindred,  I  served  far  and  wide. 

And  so  I  may  sing  and  tell  my  story ;  declare  before  the  company  in 
the  mead-hall  how  men  of  great  race  were  nobly  liberal  to  me. 

which  have  been  most  suspected  of  being   late  interpolations,   his  position 
is  untenable.     See  also  Lawrence  in  Mod.  Philol.  rv,  335,  336,  footnote. 

53.  folgade  wide.  I  followed,  served  as  a  retainer.  Eieger  reads  folgafte  wide, 
"  far  from  my  household,"  taking  wide  as  equal  to  feor.  But  this  is  hardly 
possible  grammatically,  and  is  certainly  unnecessary.  Equally  unnecessary  is 
Kulipstein's/o^atyie  wide  '  in  a  wide  retinue.' 

57.  Hreft-Gotum.     See  Appendix:  Note  H,  The  term  Hrcedas  applied  to  the 
Goths. 

58.  Geatum.     The  Geatas  of  Beowulf.     There  must  be  some  primseval  con 
nection  between  the  names  of  the  Geatas  and  of  the  Goths  ;  they  stand  in 
ablaut  relationship  :  Gaut-  to  Gut  or  Got.     (See  Bremer  in  Pauls  Grdr.  (2)  in, 
817,  818 :  Erdmann  Om  folknamnen  Gotar  och  Goter,  Stockholm,  1891.)     But 
whilst  the  Goths  were  scattered  over  Europe,  the  Geatas  (O.N.  Gautar)  have 
remained  throughout  their  whole  history  in  the  same  locality :  the  country  to 
the  south  of  the  great  lakes  Wener  and  Wetter.     Ptolemy  is  the  first  to  locate 
them  definitely  (n,   11,   16)  xal  Kar^xovaiv  CU/TTJS  [^Kavdias]. . .TO.  5e  /j.effr)n^piva 
FoOrai  [read  Fat/rat].     Procopius  knows  them  in  the  same  place  (Bell.  Gott. 
n,  15).     Already  in  Beowulf  the  Geatas  are  engaged  in  strife  with  the  Swedes 
dwelling  on  the  other  side  of  the  great  lakes :  the  strife  resulted  in  the  absorp 
tion  of  the  Geatas  into  the  Swedish  kingdom  in  prehistoric  times  (cf.  Mullenhoff , 
Beovulf,  22  ;  A.f.d.A.  xvi,  269).     In  the  earliest  definite  accounts  of  Sweden, 
those  given  by  the  Christian  missionaries,  we  hear  only  of  one  kingdom.    But 
from  the  middle  of  the  llth  to  the  middle  of  the  13th  century  warfare  between 
the  two  peoples  was  again  constant,   ending  in  the  final  absorption  of  the 
Gautar.     See  Zeuss,  511-513  ;  Bremer  in  Pauls  Grdr.  (2)  in,  833  ;  Fahlbeck  (P.) 
Den  a.  k.  striden  mellan  Svear  och  Gotar,  dess  verkliga  karaktar  och  orsaker,  in 
the  Historisk  Tidskrift,  Stockholm,  1884,  iv  (pp.  105,  etc.). 

This  identification  of  the  Geatas  and  Gautar  is  etymologically  exact,  and 
agrees  well  with  the  data  of  Beowulf:  it  has  been  accepted  by  most  scholars 
(e.g.  EttmiiDer,  Thorpe,  Grein,  Mullenhoff,  Ten  Brink,  Sarrazin,  Wiilcker, 
Earle,  Brandl,  Grienberger,  Schiick,  Schiicking,  Holthausen,  etc.)  and  seems 
as  certain  as  almost  any  of  the  ethnological  data  of  the  Old  English  epic. 

On  the  other  hand  Kemble  wished  to  locate  the  Geatas  in  Schleswig,  Grundtvig 
in  Gotland,  and  Haigh  in  England.     The   only  other  suggestion,  however,  j 
which  need  be  considered  seriously  is  that  of  Leo,  who  wished  to  identify  / 
the  Geatas  with  the  Jutes.     In  this  he  was  followed  by  Schaldemose,  Bugge 
(P.B.B.  xn,  1  etc.),  Fahlbeck,  Gummere  in  M.L.N.  iv,  421,  and  Gering  (Beowulf). 
The  arguments  in  favour  of  this  view  will  be  found  most  fully  in  Fahlbeck's 
Beovulfsqvadet  sdsom  kdlla  for  nordisk  fornhistoria  in  the  Antiqvarisk  Tidskrift 
for  Sverige,  vni,  2,  1.    Fahlbeck  points  to  a  number  of  characteristics  of  the 
Geatas  as  being  more  appropriate  to  Jutes  than  to  Gautar :  they  are  called 
scemenn,  brimwisan,  2930,  2953  ;  their  land  ealond,  2333-5 :  the  Swedes  reach 


208  Widsith 

59  Mid  Wenlum  ic  waes   ond  mid  Waernum         ond  mid 
Wicingum. 

them  ofer  sa,  2380 ;  2394,  2473.  These  arguments  are  inconclusive.  The 
strongest  evidence  in  favour  of  the  identification  of  Geatas  and  Jutes  lies  in  the 
use  of  Gotland,  Gothos,  for  Jutland,  Jutes  by  Alfred  and  Ethelwerd  :  and  of 
Eeffi-Gotaland  for  Jutland  by  the  Icelanders  :  but  this  usage,  though  puzzling, 
is  not  sufficient  to  establish  Leo's  hypothesis.  See  also  pp.  237-241,  255. 

Holt,  adds  ic  wees  after  Sweom. 

59.  Wenlum.  The  same  tribe  as  that  referred  to  in  Beowulf,  348,  where 
Wulfgar,  Wendla  leod  is  mentioned  as  dwelling  at  the  court  of  the  Danish  king 
Hrothgar.  These  Wen[d]le  or  Wen[d]las  have  been  generally  identified  with 
the  Wendilenses  of  Saxo  (Book  xiv :  called  also  Wandali,  Book  xi),  the 
inhabitants  of  Vendill,  the  modern  Vendsyssel,  in  the  north  of  Jutland. 
Whether  there  is  any  connection  between  this  tribe  and  the  great  East  Germanic 
race,  the  Vandals  of  history,  is  doubtful  (see  Bremer  in  Pauls  Grdr.  (2)  in,  818). 

Miillenhoff,  however,  would  explain  both  the  Wenlas  of  Widsith  and  the 
Wendlas  of  Beowulf  as  referring  to  these  Vandals  of  Eastern  Germany 
(Beovulf,  89) ;  he  thinks  that  Saxo  comes  too  long  after  the  time  of  Widsith 
and  Beowulf  to  justify  us,  without  further  evidence,  in  putting  a  chief  of  the 
Jutland  Wendilenses  at  the  court  of  King  Hrothgar :  Wulfgar  is  a  champion  who 
has  migrated  from  the  distant  Vandals  to  the  court  of  Hrothgar,  rather  than  a 
tributary  prince  of  the  neighbouring  Vendill.  There  is  nothing  impossible  in 
Beowulf  containing  a  reference  to  these  Vandals,  though  they  had  migrated 
long  before  to  the  South.  The  stories  recorded  by  Paul  the  Deacon  of  combats 
between  Lombards  and  Vandals  far  in  the  North-East  prove  that  the  Vandals 
were  long  remembered  in  tradition  as  dwellers  in  Northern  Germany. 
(Miillenhoff,  Beovulf,  89-90.  So  Bugge,  P.B.B.  xn,  7;  earlier  Bugge  had 
followed  Grundtvig  in  equating  the  Wendlas  with  the  Wendilenses.) 

Much  in  P.B.B.  xvn,  210-11  rejects  both  identifications,  and  supposes  the 
Wendle  to  be  neither  the  Vandali  of  Tacitus  nor  the  Wendilenses  of  Saxo,  but 
rather  a  people  akin  to  the  Angles,  and  to  those  Cimbri  who  are  noted  by 
Tacitus  (Germania,  xxxv)  and  Ptolemy  (n,  11,  7)  as  inhabiting  the  north  of 
what  is  now  Jutland.  He  supposes  the  name  Wendle  to  have  belonged  in  the 
first  place  to  these  Cimbric  '  Anglo-Frisian '  people,  and  only  later  to  have  been 
taken  over  by  the  Danish  tribe  who  had  ousted  or  assimilated  them.  Wulfgar's 
people  then  are  half  tributary  to  Hrothgar,  but  not  yet  Danish.  Much  urges 
that  the  Wenle  are  here  grouped  with  the  Wasrnas,  who  were  certainly  a 
non-Danish  tribe  akin  to  the  Angles,  and  with  the  Vikings,  a  term  which  at 
the  time  of  Widsith  would  apply  rather  to  Anglian  than  to  Danish  folk. 

The  trouble  taken  both  by  Mullenhoff  and  by  Much  to  avoid  identifying 
the  Wen[d]le  of  Beowulf  and  Widsith  with  the  Danish  inhabitants  of  Vendsyssel 
is  however  quite  unnecessary ;  for  we  can  gather  from  Procopius  that  about 
A.D.  510  the  northern  part  of  the  peninsula  had  been  already  settled  by  Danes 
(Bell.  Gott.  n,  15).  We  know  that  later  these  Danes  of  North  Jutland  were 
known  as  Vendilfolk;  it  seems  clear  then  that  the  Wendla  leod  present  at 
Hrothgar's  court  must  be  their  chief.  The  fact  that  they  are  mentioned  here 
in  a  non-Danish  context  cannot  count  for  much  :  the  poet  wanted  three  W's  to 
alliterate  (cf.  Moller,  V.E.  3,  4;  Weiland,  15;  Shuck,  43). 

There  was  a  famous  Vendil  north  of  Upsala  (cf.  K.  Stjerna  in  A.f.n.F.  xxi, 
77,  etc.)  but  there  seems  no  reason  to  localize  our  Wen[d]las  there. 

Wicingum.  Vikings.  See  1.  47.  Moller  proposes  WtiSingum,  whom  he  would 
identify  with  the  Nuithones  of  Tacitus  (Germ.  XL),  supposing  the  N  to  be 
erroneous.  These  [N]uithones  were  a  people  akin  to  the  Angles  ;  Moller  would 
locate  them  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Schleswig  and  supposes  the  name  of  the 
river  Widau  (older  Witha)  and  of  the  district  Wiedingharde  to  have  been  taken 
from  this  folk  by  the  Danish  and  Frisian  stock  who  supplanted  them,  and 
who  now  occupy  the  district  (V.E.  6-7). 

Against  this  conjecture  of  Moller's  see  Much  in  P.B.B.  xvn,  211. 

Possibly  the  line  is  to  be  taken  in  connection  with  v.  62  and  68 :  the  last 


Text  (tt.  59-61)  209 

60  Mid   Gefjmm   ic  wees  ond  mid  Wineduw         ond  mid 

Gefflegum. 

Mid   Englum   ic  wees  ond   mid   Swaefum         ond  mid 
^Enenum. 

name  in  each  line  not  being  the  name  of  a  tribe,  but  characterizing  the  preceding 
names:  "I  was  with  Vandals  and  Wasrnas  —  Vikings:  I  was  with  Saxons  and 
Sycgan  —  swordsmen  :  I  was  with  Franks  and  Frisians  —  brave  men."  But  this 
interpretation  is  very  doubtful. 

60.  Gef\>um.  The  Gepidae  ;  near  of  kin  to  the  Goths,  and  originally  their 
neighbours  at  the  mouth  of  the  Vistula.  (See  Jordanes,  iv,  xvn.)  They 
migrated  south  in  the  third  century,  and  founded  a  kingdom  in  what  is  now  the 
S.E.  of  Hungary,  which  was  overthrown  after  a  protracted  struggle  by  the 
Lombards  in  the  sixth  century  (567).  See  Hodgkin's  Italvy,  132.  They  are  .-  U, 


still  known  in  Beowulf,  though  as  a  remote  people  J^WW);  The  mention  of 
them  here  together  with  the  Wends,  which  is  not  necessitated  by  the  allitera 
tion,  points  to  their  position  in  the  extreme  east  of  Germania,  bordering  upon 
the  Slavonic  peoples.  See  Introduction,  p.  163,  note  2. 

Winedum.  The  Wends.  These  are  the  Veneti  of  whom  Tacitus  knew 
(Germ.  XLVI)  though  he  was  uncertain  whether  to  reckon  them  as  Germans 
or  not.  The  name  seems  to  have  been  given  by  the  Germans  to  their  Slavonic 
neighbours  in  the  East.  Jordanes  (xxm)  mentions  the  Veneti  as  having  formed 
part  of  the  great  empire  of  Ermanaric,  and  as  pressing  upon  the  German 
nations  in  his  day.  Hermanaricus  in  Venthos  arma  commovit,  qui,  quamvis  armis 
despecti,  sed  numerositate  pollentes,  primum  resistere  conabantur...  Nam  hi...ab 
una  stirpe  exorti,  tria  nunc  nomina  ediderunt,  id  est  Venethi,  Antes,  Sclaveni, 
qui  quamvis  nunc  ita  facientibus  peccatis  nostris  ubique  desceviunt,  tamen  tune 
omnes  Hermanarici  imperiis  servierunt  (ed.  Holder,  1882).  The  Wends  pressed 
forward  into  the  lands  between  the  Elbe  and  the  Vistula  vacated  by  the 
Germans,  where  Wulfstan  found  them  in  the  ninth  century.  (Alfred's  Orosius, 
ed.  Sweet,  1883,  p.  20.)  See  Grimm,  G.D.S.  171,  190,  322;  Miillenhoff  D.A., 
1887,  ii,  33  etc.,  89  etc.  For  the  correct  form  of  the  name  see  Collitz  in  the 
Journal  of  English  and  Germanic  Philology,  vi,  282  (1906-7). 

Gefflegum.  Unknown.  "  Nach  Skandinavien  mochten  noch  zu  setzen  sein 
die  Geflegen,  deren  Name  in  Gefle,  nordlich  von  Upsala,  erhalten  ist." 
(Lappenberg,  176.)  A  rather  desperate  guess. 

61.    Englum.     See  Introduction. 

Swcefum.     See  1.  22  above. 

jEnenum.  L.  Schmidt,  Zur  Geschichte  der  Langobarden,  Leipzig,  1885 
(p.  49),  suggests  a  connection  between  the  jEnenas  and  the  Anthaib  of  Paul  the 
Deacon.  But  this  is  ignotum  per  ignotius,  for  no  one  knows  to  what  place  or 
race  Paul  the  Deacon  was  referring  when  he  spoke  of  Anthaib  ;  neither  did  Paul 
himself,  who  took  the  word  out  of  the  Origo  gentis  Langobardorum. 

Grimm  (G.D.S.  510)  would  connect  the  ^Enenas  with  a  noble  Bavarian  race 
the  Aenniena  or  Anniona  (see  also  R.  A.  270)  which  is  quoted  in  the  Bavarian 
laws  as  enjoying  a  double  wer-gild  (Leges  Bajuuariorum,  ed.  J.  N.  Mederer, 
Ingolstadt,  1793).  Grimm  sees  in  this  line,  which  quotes  together  Angles, 
Swabians,  and  (presumably)  Bavarians,  proof  of  a  connection  which  he  is 
trying  to  establish  between  those  peoples.  See  also  Huschberg  Geschichte  des 
hauses  Scheiern-Wittelsbach  pp.  51-61,  especially  p.  55,  "Das  Adelsgeschlecht 
des  Anniona  war  ansassig  im  Hochgebirge  jenseits  des  Brenners  "  (between 
Botzen  and  Trient). 

Grimm's  interpretation  does  not  suit  the  context,  as  we  are  dealing  with  the 
North  Sea  coast.  Miillenhoff  proposed  to  identify  the  ^Enenas  with  some  tribe 
of  this  coast  [more  particularly  the  Eowan]  through  the  name  of  the  Middle 
High  German  hero  Enenum,  who  comes  from  Westenlande,  i.e.  North 
Friesland.  This  hero  would  be  the  last  reminiscence  of  the  forgotten  ^Enenas 
(Nordalb.  Stud,  i,  163). 

c.  14 


210  Widsith 

Mid   Seaxum  ic  wses  ond  [mid]  Sycgura         ond  mid 

Sweordwerum. 
Mid   Hronum  ic  wses  ond  mid   Deanum        ond  mid 

Hea]?o-Reamum. 

Mid  pyringum  ic  wses         ond  mid  prowendum 
65  ond  mid  Burgendum,        |?ser  ic  beag  ge]?ah : 
And   I  was  among  the  Burgundians;    there  I  received  an  armlet. 

62.  Seaxum.    See  Introduction,  pp.  67-69. 

mid.  Not  in  MS.  or  K,  Leo.  Supplied  by  Ettmuller  (x)  (2)  silently,  followed 
by  Thorpe  and  later  editors  ;  though  some  (Thorpe,  Grein,  Eieger)  are  not 
aware  that  mid  is  not  hi  the  MS.  Kluge  retains  the  MS.  reading. 

Sycgum.     See  above,  1.  31. 

Sweordwerum.  See  note  to  1.  59.  Lappenberg  (178)  suggested  that  we  have 
to  do  with  the  Suardones  of  Tacitus  (Germ.  XL),  a  people  neighbouring  upon, 
and  related  to  the  Angles  :  though  if  the  name  is  derived  from  sword  as  that  of 
the  Saxons  from  sahs  we  should  expect  in  Tacitus  *  Suerdones.  See  Grimm 
G.D.S.  471;  Much  in  P.B.B.  xvn,  212  ;  Weiland,  16  ;  Seelmann  Die  Bewohner 
Danemarks  vor  dem  Eindringen  der  Danen,  in  J.d.V.f.n.S.  xn  (1886)  28; 
Miillenhoff  interpreted  Suardones  as  Swordsmen  (Nordalb.  Stud,  i,  119)  but 
changed  his  mind  later  (Z.f.d.A.  xi,  286). 

63.  Hronum.     Unknown.     A  suitable  name  for  a  sea-folk :   cf.  hron  rod 
(Miillenhoff  Z.f.d.A.  xi,  287).     Apparently  from  the  context  a  Scandinavian 
people.     Grimm  (G.D.S.  751,  following  Ettmuller  (x)  22)  compares  the  Granii 
who  are  mentioned  by  Jordanes  (cap.  iii)  among  the  inhabitants  of  Scandinavia. 

The  word  of  course  means  "  whale  "  and,  says  Moller,  "  cannot  be  a  real  tribal 
name  :  people  could  only  be  called  whales  by  friend  or  foe  hi  jest."  ( V.E.  8.) 
Cf.  Kossinna  in  I.F.  vn,  304. 

Deanum.  Obviously  not  the  Danes,  "  doch  weiss  ich  solche  Deanas  oder 
altn.  Daunir  sonst  nicht  zu  zeigen,"  Grimm  G.D.S.  751.  Miillenhoff  proposed 
to  cancel  the  D,  which  he  supposed  to  have  crept  in  from  the  mid  preceding, 
and  to  read  Eawum,  the  Aviones  of  Tacitus  (cf.  1.  26  above),  or  else  "  if  any 
alteration  is  to  be  allowed "  to  read  Heahum  and  to  identify  with  the  Chauci. 
But  in  view  of  the  scantiness  of  our  sources  Miillenhoff  doubts  whether  the 
reading  may  not  be  right,  and  preserve  the  name  of  some  otherwise  unrecorded 
tribe.  (Z.f.d.A.  xi,  287.)  As  the  context  makes  it  probable  that  they  are  a 
Scandinavian  people,  it  is  tempting  to  suppose  that,  by  a  mistake  of  an  Old 
English  or  a  Greek  copyist,  they  are  the  same  people  as  are  mentioned  by 
Ptolemy  as  AavKiuves  (n,  11,  16),  and  located  by  him  hi  the  south  of  Sweden, 
but  whom  it  has  been  impossible  to  trace  in  any  other  document. 

Heabo-Reamum.    Cf.  Beowulf,  518,  of  Breca 
\>a  hine  on  morgentid 
on  Hea\>o-R(smas  [MS.  Bsemes]  holm  up  <Etbcer, 

They  dwelt  near  the  modern  Christiania.  Jordanes  (cap.  iii)  refers  to  the 
Eaumaricii  or  Raumaricice  among  the  inhabitants  of  Scandinavia.  The  Norse 
form  of  the  word  is  Raumar  or  Hafta-Raumar,  and  the  kingdom  Raumarlki,  near 
Hafta  land :  the  modern  Bomerike  and  Hadeland.  See  Grimm,  G.D.S.  751. 

Brandl  (992)  suggests  Baumsdal  in  Western  Norway. 

64.  prowendum.    The  men  of  Drontheim  (?),  ON.  prandir.    See  Lappenberg, 
176;    Grimm,  G.D.S.  751.     The  sudden  jump  from  Thuringians  to  men  of 
Drontbeim  is  strange  :  but  we  have  had  the  Scandinavian  Heatho-Beamas  just 
above  (Miillenhoff,  Z.f.d.A.  xi,  288).     Miillenhoff  earlier  (Nordalb.  Stud,  i,  165) 
tried  to  get  over  the  difficulty  by  interpreting  pyringum  as  referring  to  the 
Thuringians  of  the  lower  Bhine  (see  above  1.  30)  and  by  referring  prowendum  to 
an  Old  Frisian  Threant.    Brandl  (967)  identifies  with  the  Treveri. 

65.  Burgendum.     See  note  to  1.  19. 
ge^ah.     MS.  gefreah. 


Text  (II  62-70)  211 

me  j?aer  GuShere  forgeaf        glsedlicne  maj?]min 

songes  to  leane ;         naes  tycet  sseue  cyning  ! 

Mid   Froncum   ic   wses   ond  mid  Frysum        ond  mid 

Frumtinguwi. 
Mid   Rugum   ic  wses  ond  mid  Glommura        ond  mid 

Rurnwalum. 
70  Swylce  ic  waes  on  Eatule        mid  JElfwine  : 

Guthhere  gave  me  there  a  goodly  jewel,  the  reward  of  my  song.  He  was 
no  sluggish  king !  I  was  with  the  Franks  and  the  Frisians  and  the 
Frumtings,  the  Rugians  and  the  Glommas  and  the  Romans.  Likewise  I 

66.  Gufthere.     Thought  of,  perhaps,  as  at  Worms.     See  Introd.  pp.  58-63. 

67.  seene.     Usually  '  sluggish ' :   here  perhaps  '  niggardly. '     This  sense  is 
not  elsewhere  recorded  in  O.E.,  but  the  M.H.G.  use  of  seine  as  "too  short"  (of 
a  coat)  has  been  instanced.     (Eichler  in  Anglia,  Beiblatt  xxn,  164.) 

68.  Froncum.     See  note  to  1.  24. 

Frysum.  That  these  are  the  West  Frisians,  dwelling  west  of  the  Zuider 
Zee,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  modern  Amsterdam,  is  perhaps  implied  by 
their  being  linked  with  the  Franks,  as  in  Beowulf  2912,  1207,  1210,  where  the 
raid  of  Hygelac  [who  must  have  sailed  up  the  Rhine]  is  repulsed  by  the  joint 
[West]  Frisians,  Franks  and  Attuarii.  The  Fresno,  cynn  of  1.  27,  ruled  over  by 
Finn  Folcwalding,  refers  apparently  to  the  main  body  of  the  Frisians,  dwelling 
east  and  north  of  the  Zuider  Zee.  Heyne,  in  his  index  to  Beowulf,  notes  that 
the  land  of  these  North  [or  better  East]  Frisians,  for  they  must  not  be  confused 
with  the  modern  North  Frisians  of  the  islands,  is  called  Frysland  (1127),  that  of 
the  West  Frisians  Fresno,  land  (2916).  In  Widsith  the  e  and  y  are  reversed. 
See  Introduction,  pp.  66-7. 

Frumtingum.  Nothing  is  known  of  them.  Grimm  (G.D.S.  752)  would 
interpret  the  word  as  a  scornful  nickname.  Hullenhoff  (Z.f.d.A.  xi,  288)  would 
make  it  an  "  epic  fiction  " :  to  be  taken  here  as  an  epithet  of  the  Franks  and 
Frisians.  Moller  (V.E.  5)  would  make  it  equivalent  to  "pushing,  brave  folk." 

69.  Rugum,   Glommum.     See  above,   1.   21,   where   the   same   people   are 
coupled  together.    But  whereas  in  the  earlier  passage  they  were  mentioned  in 
connection  with  a  sea  story,  and  evidently  thought  of  as  dwelling  on  the  Baltic 
coast,  they  are  here  mentioned  in  connection  with  the  Komans,  and  are  thought 
of,  apparently,  as  dwelling  on  the  borders  of  the  Empire,  perhaps  in  what  is  now 
Austria,  which  the  Eugii  occupied  during  the  middle  of  the  fifth  century,  till 
their  overthrow  in  488 ;  or  perhaps  in  Italy  itself,  which  they  occupied  with 
the  Ostrogoths.     See  Hodgkin's  Italy,  m,  169  ;  Mullenhoff  in  Z.f.d.A.  xi,  288-9. 

Rumwalum.  The  Borne- Welsh,  i.e.  Romans.  Moller  (V.E.,  p.  iii)  proposed 
to  read  Rumwarum,  but  this  is  an  unnecessary  alteration.  The  compound  is  a 
natural  one  (cf.  Wala  rices  below,  and  Gal-walum,  the  "  Welsh  "  of  Gaul,  in  the 
A.S.  Chronicle,  sub  anno  660).  On  the  Franks  Casket  we  have  Romwalus  and 
Reumwalus  for  Bomulus  and  Remus :  cf .  Bugge,  Studier  over  de  Heltesagns 
Oprindelse,  p.  211. 

70.  Eatule.    Leo    (81)    identified    this    as    Italy.     The  identification    is 
certain  :  cf.  the  O.E.  Bede,  n,  4  (ed.  Miller,  p.  108)  Ond  he  J>a  ''Ses  ilca  papa 
[Bonefatius]  seono^S  gesomnode  Eotolwara  biscopa.     Miillenhoff  (Z.f.d.A.  xi,  289), 
Moller  (V.E.  p.  iii),  Kluge  and  Holt,  would  read  Eotule  here.     But  ea  for  eo 
occurs  elsewhere  in  Widsith,  cf.  Earmanrices  (1.  111). 

The  confusion  of  eo  and  ea  is,  of  course,  an  Anglian,  and  more  particularly 
a  Northumbrian  peculiarity :  cf.  Sievers,  Angelsdchsische  Grammatik,  3te  Aufl. 
1898,  §  150  (3).  The  West  Saxon  transcriber  has  removed  this  peculiarity  in 
the  common  nouns,  but  left  Anglian  peculiarities  in  proper  names,  which  were 
perhaps  unfamiliar  to  him. 

JElfwine.     See  Introduction,  pp.  123-6. 

14—2 


212  Widsith 

se  heefde  moncynnes         mine  gefrsege 
leohteste  bond         lofes  to  wyrcenne, 
heortan  unhneaweste         hringa  gedales,  || 
86  a  beorhtra  beaga,         beam  Eadwines. 

75  Mid  Sercingum  ic  waes         ond  mid  Seringum. 

Mid  Creacuw  ic   waes   ond   mid  Finnura         ond  mid 

Casere, 

se  be  winburga        geweald  ahte, 
wiolena  ond  wilna        ond  Wala  rices. 

was  in  Italy,  with  2Elfwine :  he  had  of  all  men  of  whom  I  have  heard  the 
readiest  hand  for  deed  of  praise,  a  heart  most  liberal  in  the  giving  of 
rings,  of  shining  armlets — the  son  of  Eadwine  !  I  was  with  the  Saracens 
and  the  Serings.  With  the  Greeks  I  was  and  with  the  Finns,  and  with 
Caesar,  he  who  had  rule  over  the  towns  of  revelry,  riches  and  joys  and 
the  realm  of  Welsh-land. 

72.     wyrcenne.     wyrceane,  Holt. 

74.  Eadwine.     See  Introduction,  pp.  123-4. 

75-87.  Brandl  (Pauls  Grdr.  n,  1,  966)  supposes  this  passage  interpolated 
by  a  half  educated  cleric  who  has  drawn  many  of  his  names  from  Alfred's 
Orosius.  But,  considering  that  very  much  the  same  ground  is  being  covered, 
the  coincidences  are  certainly  not  striking.  A  heroic  attempt  has  been  made 
by  Mr  A.  Anscombe  to  identify  many  of  the  names  in  this  passage  with  those  of 
tribes  of  Northern  Gaul  (hi  Eriu,  iv,  81-90,  The  Longobardic  Origin  of 
St  Sechnall).  I  am  not  able  to  agree  with  his  conjectures. 

For  the  character  of  this  passage,  see  Introduction,  pp.  7,  8. 

75.  Sercingum.     Saracens    (Lappenberg,    179;     followed    by    Miillenhoff, 
Z.f.d.A.   xi,  289 ;    who   compare   O.N.   Serkir,  and   the   O.H.G.  gloss   Sarzi, 
Arabes).    The  ending  ing  is  added  on  the  analogy  of  English  tribal  names. 
Other  instances   are   Seringum  (Seres),   Lidwicingum   (Letawicion,   Letavici), 
Exsyringum  (Assyrians),  Idumingum  (Ydumaei). 

Seringum.    Seres  (Lappenberg,  179).     Syrians  (Brandl). 

76.  Creacum.     See  above,  1.  20. 
Finnum.     See  11.  20,  79. 

Casere.     Here  probably  the  Emperor  of  the  West.     Contrast  1.  20. 

77.  winburga.     Holtzmann    (Deutsche    Mythol.    herausg.    Holder,    1874, 
p.  185)  would  derive  this  old  epic  word  from  wyn,  joy.     The  uniform  spelling 
win-,  and  the  parallel  medo-burg,  leave  us,  however,  no  doubt  as  to  the  deri 
vation  from  win,  wine.     Yet  the  spelling  wynburga  is  followed  by  Leo,  and 
Ettmuller  (a)  (2). 

78.  wiolena  ond  wilna.    The  MS.  has  wiolane  j  wilna,  which  was  kept  by 
Kemble  d).     J.  Grimm  (D.M.  1835,  Appendix  vi)  recognized  these  words  as 
common  nouns;  in  this  he  has  been  followed  by  Kemble  (2),  Ettmuller  (j)  (2), 
Miillenhoff  (Z.f.d.A.  xi,  289),  Bieger,  Moller  (V.E.  iii),  Wiilcker  (Kl.  Dicht. 
glossary),  Grein-Wiilcker,  Kluge,  Holt.,  Sedg. ;  Leo  kept  the  words  as  tribal 
names  Velena  and  Vylna  translating  "  Der  Walchen  und  Walchinnen  tind  des 
Walchenreicb.es."     The  words  are  also  taken  as  proper  names  by  Grein,  Thorpe 
(Cod.  Ex.  and  Beowulf),  Brandl  (Pauls  Grdr.  (2)  966-7)   and   Anscombe  in 
Anglia,  xxxv,  527  :  but  no  satisfactory  explanation  of  them  as  such  is  forth 
coming.     The  reading  of  the  text,  wiolena,  is  Rieger's. 

Wala  rices.     See  note  on  1.  69,  above. 

Bugge  sees  an  imitation  of  11.  77,  78  in  the  Viribjgrg,  Valbjorg  of  Gufrrunar- 
kvfya,  n,  33.  See  H.D.  trans.  Schofield,  xxii;  P.B.B.  xxxv,  241. 


Text  (11  71-80)  213 

Mid   Scottum   ic  wses   ond  raid  Peohtum         ond  mid 

Scride-Finnum. 

80  Mid   Lidwicingum   ic   waes    ond   mid    Leonum         ond 
mid  Longbeardum, 

79.  Scottum,    Peohtum.      Miillenhoft   (Z.f.d.A.    xi,   290)   thinks  that   the 
mention  of  these  names  proves  this  passage  to  have  been  composed  in  England. 
But  a  hard  dwelling  in  the  old  Angel  of  Schleswig  might  have  known  of  the 
Picts  and  Scots  by  repute,  as  well  as  of  the  Finns  and  Hans. 

Scride-Finnum.  One  section  of  the  widely  spread  Finnish  race,  dwelling 
more  particularly  in  the  north  of  Norway,  and  equivalent  to  Lapps  rather  than 
Finns  in  the  modern  sense.  The  Finns  mentioned  before  (1.  20)  are,  to  judge 
by  the  context  in  which  they  occur,  the  more  southern  section  of  the  people, 
dwelling  east  and  north-east  of  the  Baltic.  The  Scridefinnas  take  their  dis 
tinguishing  title  from  sliding  (Icel.  skrifta)  with  snow-shoes  as  is  explained  by 
Paul  the  Deacon.  Scritobini...qui  etiam  ce&tatis  tempore  nivibus  non  carent,  nee 
aliud,  ut  pote  feris  ipsis  ratione  non  dispares,  quam  crudis  agrestium  animantium 
carnibus  vescuntur;  de  quorum  etiam  hirtis  pellibus  sibi  indumenta  peraptant. 
Hi  a  saliendo  juxta  linguam  barbaram  ethimologiam  ducunt.  Saltibus  enim, 
utentes  arte  quadam  ligno  incurvo  ad  arcus  similitudinem,  feras  adsecuntur. 
Paulus  (i,  5,  ed.  Waitz,  p.  50).  Procopius  gives  an  account  of  the  ZtcpiOtyivot, 
whom  he  numbers  amongst  the  inhabitants  of  Thule  [not  Iceland,  but 
Scandinavia].  They  are  clothed  in  skins,  and  live  by  hunting:  the  mother 
suspends  her  newly  born  babe,  in  a  skin,  from  a  tree  :  puts  a  fragment  of 
marrow  in  its  mouth,  and  leaves  it  whilst  she  goes  hunting  with  her  husband. 
But  Procopius  cannot  vouch  for  the  customs  of  Thule  from  personal  experience  : 
'Ejiioi  /j.tv  ovv  ^s  Twurrfv  Ui>ai  rr)v  vrjffov,  TWV  re  elpr}fj.fruv  ai>T6irTri  yev4ff6ai,  xalirep 
y\iXOfJLtv<{>,  T/)6ir(f>  ovSevl  ^w^x^7/-  (Bell.  Gott.  n,  15.)  Jordanes  also  mentions 
the  Scride-finnas  among  the  inhabitants  of  the  island  of  Scandia,  but  his  scribes 
have  corrupted  the  name — Screrefennce,  Crefennce,  Rerefennte,  possibly  confusing 
the  Scride-finnas  with  another  great  branch  of  the  family,  the  Ter-finnas. 
The  Geographer  of  Eavenna  similarly  gets  confused  over  the  name.  In  the 
9th  century  the  Scridefinnas  are  mentioned  by  Alfred  in  his  Orosius  (ed.  Sweet, 
1883,  p.  16),  be  westannofftan  him  [the  Swedes]  sindon  Scridefinnas  and  be 
westan  Norftmenn.  Saxo  speaks  of  the  Scritfinni  or  Scricfinni  (ed.  Holder,  1886, 
p.  8).  See  also  Zeuss,  p.  684,  and  some  notes  by  Dahlmann  in  explanation  of 
Alfred's  reference  to  the  Finns  (Konig  JElfred's  Germania),  in  his  Forschungen, 
i,  451-454  ;  Bojunga  in  P.B.B.  xvi,  547  ;  Miillenhoff,  D.A.  n,  44. 

80.  Lidwicingum.     E.  Michel  in  P.B.B.  xv,  377,  etc.  regards  this  name  as 
merely  a  variant  of  Wicingum  (cf.  Dene  and  Sa-Dene) ;   and  Bojunga,  in  his 
criticism  of  Michel  (P.B.B.  xvi,  545),  gives  a  silent  consent  to  this  view ;   so 
Grein,  and  Wiilcker  iu  Kl.  Dicht.  129.     But  from  the  use  of  the  name  in  the 
A.S.  Chronicle  sub  anno  885  we  may  be  almost  certain  that  the  Armoricans,  or 
Letavici,  are  referred  to.     In  that  year  is  noted  the  accession  of  Charles  the  Fat 
to  the  full  domains  of  his  great  grandfather  butan  Lidwiccium  (Parker  MS.) 
or  Lidwiccum  (Cotton  Tib.  A.  6).     MSB.  Tib.  B.  1  and  B.  4  have,  however, 
Lidwicingum.    The  form  Lioftwicas  is  found  in  a  later  entry  (Tib.  B.  4  sub 
anno  915)  but  Lidwiccas  is  the  more  usual  form  (cf.  years  910,  918).     In  view 
of  the  other  passages  in  our  poem  in  which  the  termination  ing  has  been  added 
it  seems  clear  that  the  reference  is  to  the  Lidwiccas.    [The  popular  etymology  of 
the  word  is  given  in  certain  BISS.  of  the  Historia  Brittonum :  the  Britons  who 
settled  Armorica  slew  the  original  inhabitants,  and  married  their  wives,  having 
first  cut  out  their  tongues  lest  they  should  corrupt  the  purity  of  their  children's 
speech :    acceptisque  eorum  uxoribus  et  filiabus  in  coniugium,   omnes   earum 
linguas  amputaverunt,  ne   eorum  successio  maternam  linguam  disceret.     Unde 
et  nos  illos  vocamus  in  nostra  lingua  Letewicion,  id  est  Semitacentes,  quoniam 
confuse  loquuntur.  (Historia  Brittonum,  in  Mommsen's  Cronica  Minora  (M.G.H.), 
in,  167,  note.)     The  story  is  also  told  by  Borrow  in  his  Wild  Wales  and  in 
Skene's  Celtic  Scotland,  1886,  i,  201 ;  in,  96.     See  also  Zeuss,  577-8.] 


214  Widsith 

8 1  mid   HaeSnum   ond   mid   Hserejmm        ond  mid  Hun- 
dingum. 

Leonum.  Dwellers  in  what  is  now  Ostergotland,  in  the  S.E.  of  Sweden. 
They  are  probably  the  Aeuwvoi  of  Ptolemy  :  KO.I  Kar^xovffiv  aflrijs  (i.e.  SKCIJ'- 
5/aj)  TO.  fdv  dvriKCL  "Kaideivol,  rd.  8e  /uea-jj/^Spti'ii.  Tovrai  Kal  Aavxluves,  ra  de 
fdffa  Aev&voi  (ed.  Miiller,  1883,  n,  11,  16).  Ptolemy's  account  would  thus  put 
the  Haftnas  in  the  west,  the  Geatas  and  the  "Dauciones"  in  the  south,  and 
the  Leonas  in  the  middle.  The  identification  of  the  Leonas  and  the  Aevwvoi 
has,  however,  been  disputed :  some  would  amend  the  latter  to  Suewpoi,  and 
identify  with  the  Suiones  of  Tacitus.  (Bremer  in  Pauls  Grdr.  Q  in,  830 ;  see 
also  818.)  It  is  fairly  clear  that  we  must  identify  the  Leonas  with  the 
Lio-thida  [thida  =  Goth.  \>iuda,  people]  mentioned  by  Jordanes  together  with  a 
number  of  other  pbscure  tribes  dwelling  in  Scandia ;  and  that  they  are  identical 
with  the  men  of  Ostergotland,  whose  capital  is  Linkb'ping,  the  old  Liongkopungr, 
and  whose  common  parliament  was  known  as  the  Lionga-]>ing.  See  Collin  u. 
Schlyter,  Codex  juris  Ostrogotici  (Ostgotalagen)  in  their  Samling  af  Sweriges 
gamla  Lagar,  1831.  Of.  also  Lappenberg,  176 ;  Zeuss,  506 ;  Miillenhoff  in 
Z.f.d.A.  xi,  290.  Miillenhoff,  who  regards  the  whole  passage  75-87  as  inter 
polated,  notes  as  remarkable  the  interpolator's  acquaintance  with  Scandinavian 
names,  Leonum,  Haftnum,  HcBre&um. 

Longbeardum.     See  1.  32. 

81.  Hceftnum.  Probably  the  XatSeivol  of  Ptolemy  n,  11,  16,  quoted  in  the 
previous  note  (so  Lappenberg,  175) ;  the  Heiftnir  of  Scandinavian  history, 
inhabitants  of  the  Heffimork  on  the  borders  of  Norway  and  Sweden.  See 
Bremer  in  Pauls  Grdr.  (2)  in,  830;  Much  in  P.B.B.  xvn,  188;  Zeuss,  159. 
Leo,  Ettmuller  (j)  (in  his  text,  but  not  in  his  notes  where  he  follows  Lappen 
berg),  Moller  (V.E.  8)  take  the  word  as  a  common  noun  "  Heathen,"  but  that 
seems  unlikely  here.  See  also  Bugge,  P.B.B.  xn,  10 ;  Miillenhoff  in  Mommsen's 
Jordanes,  165;  Heyne-Schiicking,  120-316. 

It  is  probably  only  an  odd  coincidence  that  what  appear  to  be  mutilated 
forms  of  these  names  occur  together  in  Beowulf  (1982-4),  where  Hcereftes 
dohtor  bears  the  tankard  Hce\j$]num  to  handa.  See  Sarrazin  in  Engl.  Stud. 
XLII,  17,  18. 

ic  was  is  added  after  Haftnum  by  Ettmuller,  Thorpe  (Beowulf),  etc., 
Holt. 

Heere\>um.  MS.  htsle\>um :  the  correction  was  made  by  Lappenberg  (179) 
followed  by  Ettmuller  (j)  (Haroftum  in  his  notes,  though  he  still  reads  htzlebum 
in  the  text),  Grein,  Bieger,  Moller,  Wiilcker  in  Kl.  Dicht,  Holt,  and 
Sedg.  But  Ettmuller  (2),  Thorpe  and  Kluge  retain  the  MS.  reading.  The 
Herethas  occur  in  the  A.-S.  Chronicle  (Laud  MS.)  sub  anno  787,  On  his  dagum 
comon  (Brest  HI  scipu  NortSmanna  of  Hereftalande.  Dcet  w<zron  ]>a  erstan  scipu 
Deniscra  manna  \>e  Angelcynnes  land  gesohton.  The  Herethas  slay  the  king's 
reeve,  who  wishes  to  drive  them  to  the  town,  because  he  knows  not  who  they 
are.  These  Herethas  are  the  dwellers  in  the  Norse  HqriSaland  on  the  Hardanger- 
fiord.  From  their  ravages  Hiruaith  comes  to  be  the  Irish  name  for  Norway 
(Zimmer  in  Z.f.d.A.  xxxir,  205-6).  There  seem,  however,  to  be  another  people 
of  the  same  name  dwelling  in  Jutland  :  the  inhabitants  of  HqrtS  a  Jotlandi,  the 
later  Hardesyssel  or  Harsyssel.  It  is  probably  with  this  Jutland  branch  that 
we  must  identify  the  XapoOSes  of  Ptolemy,  who  are  clearly  inhabitants  of  the 
present  Denmark.  Ptolemy  traces  the  tribes  along  the  sea-coast  till  he  comes 
to  the  Cimbric  Chersonese,  where  the  XapoCSes  dwell  to  the  East,  and  the  Cimbri 
to  the  North  :  dvaroXiKurrepoi  de  XapovSes,  irdvrwv  5'  dptcriKwrepoi  Kip/Spot,  (n,  11, 
7,  ed.  Miiller,  1883).  The  same  people  are  mentioned  with  the  Cimbri  on  the 
Monument.  Ancyranum  :  Cimbri  et  Chariides  et  Semnones  et  ejusdem  tractus  alii 
Germanorum  populi  per  legatos  amicitiam  meam  et  populi  Eomani  petierunt. 
(See  Suetonius,  ed.  Wolf,  2,  375.)  For  other  references  to  the  Haruthi  see 
Much  in  P.B.B.  xvn,  203-5  :  Zeuss,  152,  507,  519. 

Hundingum.     See  1.  23. 


Text  (II  81-86)  215 

Mid  Israhelum  ic  wees         ond  mid  Exsyrmgum, 
mid  Ebreum  ond  mid  Indeum         ond  mid  Egyptum. 
Mid   Moid  urn   ic   waes   ond   mid    Persum         ond   mid 

Myrgingum 
85  ond  Mofdingum         ond  ongend  Myrgingum 

ond  mid  Amothingum.         Mid  East-pyringum  ic  wses 

82.  Exsyringum.     Miillenhoff  suggests  Assyrians  (Z.f.d.A.  xi,  291 ;  Grein- 
Wiilcker,  i,  401).     So  Brandl. 

Holt,  supposes  a  name  to  have  dropped  out  in  this  line. 

83.  Indeum.    Grein  reads  Judeum  by  a  slip  of  the  pen.    Holt,  adds  ic  was 
after  Ebreum. 

84.  Moidum.    Medes  (Miillenhoff,  Brandl  as  above).    Holt,  alters  to  Medum  : 
but  cf.  note  by  Sarrazin  quoted  in  Vietor  Festschrift,  Marburg,  1910,  p.  309. 

Persum.  This  has  always  been  taken  as  "Persians"  and  in  the  neighbour 
hood  of  Moidum,  "  Medes,"  it  is  impossible  to  render  it  otherwise.  Mr  Anscombe 
(Eriu,  iv,  88)  points  out  that  Perse  is  used  in  the  A.-S.  Chronicle  for  Parisii, 
sub  anno  660.  It  is  just  conceivable  that  here  Widsith  is  not  so  much  inter 
polated  as  corrupted ;  that  Persum  and  Idumingum  may  have  stood  in  the 
original  poem,  and  have  referred  to  Celtic  and  Baltic  tribes :  that,  then,  the 
passage  being  imperfectly  remembered  or  transcribed,  someone  proceeded  to  fill 
up  the  gaps  with  Biblical  names,  which  were  suggested  by  the  (apparently) 
Biblical  Perse  and  Idumingas. 

Myrgingum.  It  is  strange  that  the  interpolator  should  place  the  poet's  own 
people,  twice,  amongst  these  exotic  semi-biblical  folk.  Hence  Miillenhoff  (in 
Grein-Wiilcker,  i,  401)  suggests  that  the  people  really  meant  here  are  the  Myrce ; 
the  JElmyrcan  and  GuSmyrce  of  the  Andreas  and  the  Exodus. 

85.  Mofdingum.     Mullenhoff  gave  up  these  people,  and  the  Amothinge,  in 
despair,  as  "undinge" — perversions  of  some  originally  non-Germanic  names 
(Z.f.d.A.  xi,  291).    Later  (in  Grein-Wiilcker,  i,  401)  he  identifies  them  with 
Moabites  and  Ammonites.    So  also  Brandl  (p.  966).    Grein  suggested  tentatively 
mid   Ofdingum  (=?  the   Ubii).      Lappenberg   (179)   suggested  the   Germanic 
settlers  of  Moffat  in  Scotland ! 

Bieger  reads  Mid  Mofdingum  and  mid  Ongendmyrgingum. 

ongend  Myrgingum.  Holt,  suggests  Mid  Mofdingum  ic  wees  ond  mid 
Mceringum :  Sedg.  adopts  Maringum.  Cf.  Dear,  19 ;  but  this  epic  name  of 
Theodoric's  retainers  seems  out  of  place  in  the  same  line  with  those  of 
Biblical  peoples.  Rieger  and  Gummere  take  Ongendmyrgingum  as  a  compound 
name.  I  should  rather  take  ongend  as  a  preposition  (  —  ongen,  cf.  Ongend\>eow 
above)  and  translate  "I  was  with  the  Myrgings...and  I  was  against  the 
Myrgings  " :  an  attempt  of  the  interpolator  to  harmonize  passages  like  38-44, 
where  the  poet  is  apparently  opposed  to  the  Myrgings,  with  93-6. 

85,  86  are  metrically  defective.     They  have  been  rearranged  in  a  number  of 
different  ways  by  the  editors.     The  arrangement  followed  is  that  of  Grein, 
Grein-Wiilcker,  Moller,  and  Kluge. 

86.  Amothingum.     Grimm  points  out  that  the  spelling  (th  for  b)  is  sus 
picious,  and  suggests  Amolingas.     The  Amals  were  the  ruling  family  among 
the   Ostrogoths   (Vesegotha  families  Balthorum,    Ostrogotlue  prceclaris  Amalis 
serviebant,  Jordanes,  ed.  Holder,  cap.   v).     Hence  the  title  Amulinga  under 
which  Alfred  refers  to  Theodoric,     The  name  Amelunc  remains  in  Middle  High 
German  as  one  of  his  titles  ;  more  generally,  however,  it  is  used  with  reference 
to  Theodoric's  followers,  and  this  is  the  meaning  which  Giimm  would  give  to 
the  word  here  (G.D.S.  p.  598).     Lappenberg  (179)  identified  with  the  Othingi 
of  Jordanes  (in,  21)  followed  by  Ettmuller  d)  24  and  Thorpe  (Cod.  Ex.  520). 
Nothing  is  to  be  said  in  favour  of  this.     Ettmuller  rearranged  the  line  mid 
Amothingum   ic  vces   and   mid   East\>yringum ;    similarly  Holt.,   but   reading 
Amoringum,  "Amorites."    See  also  above,  1.  85. 


216  Widsith 

87  ond  mid  Eolum  ond  mid  Istum         ond  Idumingum. 
Ond  ic  wses  mid  Eormanrice         ealle  )>rage, 

And  I  was  with  Ermanaric  all  the  time :  there  the  king  of  the  Goths 

East-\>yringum.  The  Thuringians,  called  East-Thuringians,  either  (1)  to 
distinguish  them  from  the  people  of  the  same  name  dwelling  in  Zeeland  and 
North-Brabant  (see  above,  1.  30),  or  (2)  as  indicating  that  portion  of  the 
Thuringians  which  in  the  sixth  century  was  still  dwelling  east  of  the  Elbe  ; 
as  suggested  by  Seelmann  (Nordthttringen  in  J.d.V.f.n.S.  xn,  1886,  p.  1). 
MiillenhofFs  later  interpretation  of  the  name  (Grein-Wiilcker,  i,  401)  as  a 
corruption  of  "Assyrian"  is  unlikely. 

87.  Eolum.  The  name  cannot  be  identified,  and  is  probably  corrupt. 
Grimm,  apparently  by  an  oversight,  offered  two  different  conjectures  in  the 
G.D.S. :  (1)  he  suggested  (p.  598)  the  emendation  Eorlum,  interpreting  the 
(H)eruli,  *E/jouXot.  Linguistically  this  would  be  quite  satisfactory.  Corre 
sponding  to  Eruli  we  should  expect  O.N.  *Jarlar ;  O.E.  *Eorlas  :  the  name 
is  probably  connected  with  the  common  noun  eorl  "lord":  the  "u"  in  the 
classical  form  Heruli  is  not  original  (Moller  in  A.f.d.A.  xxn,  152,  160).  This 
etymology  is  to  be  preferred  to  the  derivation  from  heru  "  sword,"  supported  by 
Grimm  (G.D.S.  470)  and  Erdmann  (77).  (2)  ,In  G.D.S.  736,  Grimm  suggested 
Eotum  ;  these  would  be  identical  with  the  Ytum  of  1.  26  (q.v.).  Miillenhoff  (in 
Grein-Wiilcker,  i,  401)  suggests  that  the  name  is  a  corruption  of  Elam  or  Elath, 
Brandl  of  Eowland,  Holt,  of  Aeoles,  Aeolians. 

Grimm's  first  identification,  with  the  Heruli,  is  the  more  probable.  These 
seem  to  have  been  a  Scandinavian  people,  southern  neighbours  of  the  Geatas. 
They  also  occupied  at  a  very  early  date  portions  probably  of  the  south  coast  of 
Scandinavia  and  of  the  adjacent  islands,  from  which  they  were  driven  by  the 
Danes.  (Dani...Herulos  propriis  sedibus  expulerunt,  Jordanes,  in.)  The  Heruli 
seem  to  have  wandered  over  Europe,  and  to  have  been  engaged  as  mercenaries 
in  many  places.  Jordanes  repeatedly  refers  to  their  swiftness  and  value  as  light- 
armed  troops.  Procopius  (Bell.  Gott.  n,  14,  15)  gives  a  less  favourable  account 
of  them.  Of  old  they  had  been  accustomed  to  put  to  death  their  sick  and  aged, 
and  to  compel  widows  to  commit  suicide ;  and  in  spite  of  their  becoming  allies 
of  Borne  and  nominally  Christians,  they  remained  dirurroi.  ical  ir\eoi>f£iq.  tx6- 
fj.fi>oi...trovr]p&Ta.Toi  avOpdnruv  aTrdvrwv.  After  their  overthrow  by  the  Lombards, 
a  party  of  them  returned  to  Thule  (Scandinavia).  They  disappear  from  history 
in  the  sixth  century  :  and  the  absence  of  any  mention  of  them  in  Beowulf,  the 
scene  of  whose  actions  is  laid  near  what  had  been  their  territory,  is  noteworthy 
[but  cf.  Miillenhoff,  Nordalb.  Stud,  i,  124-5].  Miillenhoff  (Beovulf,  30-32)  would 
identify  them  with  the  Heatho-beardan. 

Note  that  Theodoric  addresses  together  the  kings  of  the  Thoringi  and  Heruli 
(Varite,  in,  3).  See  Seelmann,  Das  Norddeutsche  Herulerreich  in  the  J.d.V.f.n.S. 
1886,  pp.  53-7. 

Istum.     See  Appendix,  Note  F. 

Idumingum.     See  Appendix,  Note  G. 

Ettmiiller,  Grein  and  Bieger  (who  transposes  Eolum  and  Eastty/ringum  and 
assumes  a  gap  after  Istum)  insert  mid  before  Idumingum.  Holt,  reads :  mid 
Eolum  ic  wees  ond  mid  Istum  ond  mid  Idumingum.  I  follow  the  MS.  closely 
throughout  all  this  passage.  The  evidence  which  it  shows  of  an  unskilled 
hand  may  throw  light  upon  the  history  of  the  poem,  and  should  therefore  be 
retained. 

88.  Thorpe  suggested  that  ealle  ]rrage  should  be  taken  in  close  connection 
with  gode  dohte,  "all  which  time  to  me  the  Gothic  king  was  bounteously  kind." 
This  gives  sense :  Eormanric  was  treacherous  and  hasty,  and  might  well  not 
have  been  consistently  bounteous  all  the  time  Widsith  was  with  him.  The 
recognized  punctuation  would  give  "I  was  with  E.  all  the  time,"  the  meaning 
of  which  is  not  clear  ;  and  if  this  punctuation  is  kept  we  must  agree  with 
Lawrence  (Mod.  Philol.  p.  359)  that  the  line  does  not  follow  well  on  the  pre 
ceding  line,  nor  yet  make  such  a  faultless  connection  with  1.  74  as  Miillenhoff 


Text  (II  87-101)  217 

}*er  me  Gotena  cyning        gode  dohte; 
90  se  me  beag  forgeaf,        burgwarena  fruma, 

on  J?am  siex  hund  waes        smaetes  goldes 

gescyred  sceatta         scillingrime  ; 

J?one  ic  Eadgilse         on  aeht  sealde, 

minum  hleodryhtne,         )>a  ic  to  ham  bicwom 
95  leofum  to  leane,         J?aes  J?e  he  me  lond  forgeaf, 

mines  faeder  ej?el,         frea  Myrginga. 

ond  me  Ipa,  Ealhhild         o)>erne  forgeaf, 

dryhtcwen  duguj?e,         dohtor  Eadwines. 

Hyre  lof  lengde         geond  londa  fela, 
too  ]>onne  ic  be  songe         secgan  sceolde, 

hwser  ic  under  swegl[e]         selast  wisse 

was  bounteous  unto  rne.  Lord  of  cities  and  their  folk,  he  gave  me  an 
armlet,  in  which  there  was  reckoned  of  refined  gold,  six  hundred  pieces 
counted  in  shillings.  This  I  gave  into  the  possession  of  my  lord  and 
protector  Eadgils,  when  I  came  home:  a  gift  unto  my  beloved  prince, 
because  he,  lord  of  the  Myrgings,  gave  me  my  land,  the  home  of  my 
father.  A  second  ring  then  Ealhild  gave  unto  me,  noble  queen  of 
chivalry,  daughter  of  Eadwiue.  Through  many  lands  her  praise  extended, 
when  I  must  tell  in  song,  where  under  the  heavens  I  best  knew  a  queen 

maintained  (Z.f.d.A.  xi,  291) :  something  has  therefore  in  that  case  presumably 
been  lost,  as  well  as  something  interpolated.  Thorpe's  rendering  appears  to  me 
forced,  and  I  doubt  if  we  can  take  \ar  with  ealle  \rage,  as  suggested  by  Eichler 
in  Anglia,  Beiblatt  xxn,  164  :  "  alle  die  Zeit  iiber,  in  der  mien  der  Gotenkonig 
beschenkte."  See  Introduction,  p.  21  etc. 

91-2.  The  sceatt  is  sometimes  a  fixed  sum  :  a  subdivision  of  the  shilling  : 
but  often  its  meaning  is  quite  vague,  "a  piece  of  money."  It  is  best  so  taken 
here,  the  value  of  the  sceatt  being  then  defined  by  scillingrime.  See  Appendix, 
Note  N,  On  the  beag  given  by  Eormanric. 

gescyred ;  reckoned,  numbered,  as  in  the  Pharao,  of  Pharaoh's  chariots 
\&t  \ar  screoda  ware  gescyred  rime 
siex  hundreda  searohcebbendra . 

So  here  "in  which  there  was  reckoned  of  refined  gold,  six  hundred  pieces 
counted  in  shillings,"  i.e.  the  ring  was  worth  six  hundred  shillings  (so  Koegel, 
Ltg.  i,  1,  139).  It  is  not  necessary  to  press  the  passage  further,  or  to  suppose, 
with  Clark  Hall  (Beowulf,  1901,  p.  177)  and  Stopford  Brooke  (r,  3),  that  the 
ring  was  scored  into  six  hundred  sections,  each  of  the  weight  and  value  of  a 
shilling. 

beaghord  for  beag,  the  suggestion  of  Grein,  and  on  scillingrime,  the  suggestion 
of  Ettmiiller  (1),  are  unnecessary  alterations  of  the  text. 

95-6.  The  land  had  not  necessarily,  as  Koegel  supposes  (Ltg.  i,  1,  139), 
been  forfeited  or  lost :  but  on  the  death  of  the  father  it  would  have  needed  to 
be  granted  anew  to  the  son  (cf.  Beowulf,  2607,  etc.).  This  is  all  that  is  neces 
sarily  implied  in  Widsith's  statement  that  his  lord  gave  him  his  father's 
inheritance. 

96.  Ettmiiller  d)  places  a  full  stop  after  Myrginga,  rightly :  Ettmiiller  (2) 
a  semicolon.  See  Introduction,  p.  27. 

101.  swegle.  MS.  swegl,  followed  by  K.,  Thorpe  (Cod.  Ex.) ;  swegle,  Leo, 
etc.,  rightly. 


218  Widsith 

goldhrodene  cwen||        giefe  bryttian. 

Bonne  wit  Scilling        sciran  reorde 

for  uncrum  sigedryhtne         song  ahofan, 
105  hlude  bi  hearpan         hleo)>or  swinsade, 

}>onne  monige  men        modum  wlonce 

wordum  sprecan,        )?a  ]?e  wel  cu)>an, 

Ipcet  hi  nsefre  song        sellan  ne  hyrdon. 

Donan  ic  ealne  geondhwearf        e]?el  Gotena, 
no  sohte  ic  £  [ge]si)>a         ]?a  selestan : 

]?aet  wses  innweorud         Earmanrices. 

HeScan  sohte  ic  ond  Beadecan         ond  Herelingas 

adorned  with  gold  giving  forth  treasure.  When  Scilling  and  I  with  clear 
voice  raised  the  song  before  our  noble  lord  (loud  to  the  harp  the  words 
made  melody)  then  many  men  cunning  and  great  of  mind  said  they  had 
never  heard  a  better  song. 

Thence  I  wandered  through  all  the  land  of  the  Goths :  I  ever  sought 
the  best  of  comrades,  that  was  the  household  of  Ermanaric.  Hethca 
I  sought  and  Beadeca,  and  the  Harlungs,  Emerca  and  Fridla,  and  East- 

102.  giefe.     Thorpe  (Beowulf)  suggests  giefa :  unnecessarily. 

103.  Donne.    MS.  don,  followed  by  Kemble,  Schaldemose.    Later  edd.,  Leo, 
Ettmiiller  d)  (2),  Thorpe,  Bieger  have  altered  d  to  ft  silently. 

Scilling.  The  name  survived  in  England  till  historic  times.  A  Scilling 
presbyter  signs  charters  in  Wessex  during  the  third  quarter  of  the  eighth  century 
{Birch,  Cart.  Sax.  i,  186,  200);  as  does  a  contemporary  Scilling,  prefectus 
(Birch,  i,  224,  225),  also  in  Wessex :  a  Scilling  also  witnesses  a  Mercian  charter 
(Birch,  i,  181)  of  approximately  the  same  date. 

106-7.  Moller  (V.E.  10)  condemns  these  verses  as  "  wooden,"  and  supposes 
them  expanded  by  an  interpolator  from  the  simple 

]>onne  wordum  sprecan  wlonce  monige. 

Granting  the  woodenness,  we  have  no  right  to  assume  that  authentic  O.E.  poets 
never  wrote  anything  wooden. 

107.  sprecan.     Leo,  Ettmiiller  d),  unnecessarily  normalize  to  the  W.S. 
sprcecon ;   e  for  OK  is  simply  a  survival  of  tbe  original  Anglian  dialect  of  the 
poem. 

108.  sellan.    scelran,  Leo,  Ettmiiller  (j)  :  selran,  Ettmiiller  (2) :  sellan  song, 
Holt,  for  metrical  reasons. 

109.  Donan,  i.e.  from  the  hall  of  Ermanaric.     See  Introduction,  p.  53,  etc. 
Moller  (V.E.  2-3)  supposes  these  lines  in  the  first  place  to  have  followed  im 
mediately  after  11.  88  and  89,  and  Scwum  to  refer  to  "Seer.     Widsith  first  visits 
the  court  of  Ermanaric  and  there  receives  a  ring :  thence  he  voyages  through 
the  whole  Gothic  land. 

110.  gesfya.    The  MS.,  followed  by  Kemble  and  Thorpe,  has  sfya,  "  of  courses 
I  ever  sought  the  best,"  so  Wulcker  in  Kl.  Dicht.  ;  Leo  siftlSan ;  Ettmiiller  (i) 
gesVSa,  followed  by  Grein,  Eieger,  Grein- Wulcker,  Kluge,  Holt.,  Sedg. 

110  is  clearly  to  be  taken  in  close  connection  with  1.  109  :  the  semicolon 
inserted  at  the  end  of  that  1.  by  Grein,  and  followed  by  Wiilcker,  is  better 
replaced  by  a  comma,  as  suggested  by  Mullenhoff,  Z.f.d.A.  xi,  291. 

111.  Earmanrices.    Kemble,  Leo,  Ettmuller,  Thorpe,  Grein  and  Holt,  would 
alter  Ea  to  Eo.    But  cf.  Eatule  for  Eotule  in  1.  70. 

112.  Heftca.    Unknown  (Binz  in  P.B.B.  xx,  153).     Mullenhoff  (in  Beovulf, 
1,  64)  speaks  as  if  Heftca  came  into  tbe  East  Saxon  genealogy.     This  however 
is  not  the  case:  only  Biedca,  Bedca  appears  there.     Sarrazin  (Anglia,  ix,  202) 


Text  (U.  102-116)  219 

Emercan  sohte  ic  ond  Fridlan         ond  East-Gotan, 
frodne  ond  godne         feeder  Unwenes. 

115  Seccan  sohte  ic  ond  Beccan,         Seafolan  ond  peodric, 
Heaj?oric  ond  Sifecan         Hli]>e  ond  Incgenbeow. 

Gota,  sage  and  good,  the  father  of  Unwen.  Secca  I  sought  and  Becca, 
Seafola  and  Theodric,  Heathoric  and  Sifeca,  Hlithe  and  Incgentheow. 

suggests  that  Beadeca  and  HeSca  may  be  identical  with  the  Boftvarr  and 
Hgttr  of  the  saga  of  Eolf  Kraki.  This  seems  an  exceedingly  improbable 
conjecture. 

Beadeca  was  a  well-known  hero  in  England :  his  name  is  associated  with 
lea,  well,  and  hill  (see  Binz  in  P.B.B.  xx,  152-3),  and,  in  the  form  Bedca, 
comes  into  the  East  Saxon  genealogy,  as  given  by  Florence  of  Worcester  (ed. 
Thorpe  for  English  Historical  Society,  1848,  i,  250),  and  as  Biedca  into  Henry 
of  Huntingdon  (Historic  Anglomm,  11,  §  19,  ed.  Arnold,  1879,  Bolls  Series, 
p.  49).  See  also  Grimm,  D.M.,  Anhang,  Patuhho. 

The  vowel  is  short ;  not  Beadccan,  as  Grein,  Ettmiiller  (j). 

Herelingas,  Emercan  ond  Fridlan.     See  Introduction,  pp.  28-36. 

113.  sohte  ic.     Mullenhoff  (Z.f.d.A.  xi,  291-293)  regards  the  repetition  of 
sohte  ic  as  due  to  interpolation.    It  certainly  seems  wrong  here,  for  Emerca  and 
Fridla  are  the  Harlungs,  and  the  two  words  were  therefore  rightly  deleted  by 
Ettmiiller  d)  (2).     But  Miillenhoff  would  also  strike  it  out  in  11.  112,  115,  117, 
119,  123,  on  the  ground  that  it  overfills  the  line.     This  however  would  mean 
that  sohte  ic  would  have  to  be  understood  in  1.  123  from  1.  110,  in  spite  of  a 
parenthesis  (119-122)  of  several  lines  intervening.     To  avoid  this  Mullenhoff 
would  take  the  names  in  123,  124  not  as  accusatives  after  sohte  ic  [understood] 
but  as  nominatives  in  apposition  to  Hrceda  here  :  altering  Wudgan  and  Haman 
into  Wudga  and  Hama. 

East-Gotan.  Bojunga  and  Wiilcker  (Kl.  Dicht.  glossary)  have  taken  as 
plural,  "Eastgoths"  :  but  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  this  is  a  reference  to  the 
hero  Ostrogotha,  for  whom  see  Introduction,  pp.  13-15. 

114.  Unwenes.    Jordanes  (xiv,  79)  has  "  Ostrogotha  autem  genuit  Hunuil: 
Hunuil  item  genuit  Athal,"  upon  which  Mullenhoff  comments  Hunuil  nominis 
certe  ultimam  partem  corruptam  esse  nemo  non  videt.     He  suggests  in  view  of 
this  passage  in  Widsith  that  Unuin  should  be  read  :  Unwin  stands  for  Unwen  as 
Thiudimir  interchanges  with  Thiuderner.     The  name  means  a  son  born  beyond 
hope,  cf.  Z.f.d.A.  xn,  253.     Unwen  must  have  been  a  famous  hero  to  have 
been  remembered  in  England  till  after  the  Norman  Conquest  (see  Appendix  K). 
Yet  he   does  not   succeed  his  father   Ostrogotha  in   Gothic   story :    he   was 
therefore  presumably  cut  off  in  his  youth.     Was  it  in  this  connection  that 
Ostrogotha,  like   Thurisind   or   Olaf  the  Peacock,  showed  his  characteristic 
patience  ? 

115.  Seccan.     See  Mullenhoff  in  Z.f.d.A.  xi,  276. 
Beccan.     See  above,  1.  19. 

Seafolan  ond  peodric.     See  Introduction,  pp.  40-44. 

Seafola  probably  signifies  "the  cunning  one"  from  a  root  preserved  in 
O.E.  sefa,  "  understanding,"  or  Latin  sapere.  (Mullenhoff  in  Z.f.d.A.  xxx,  240 ; 
Much  in  P.B.B.  xvn,  199.)  The  names  of  the  traitors  Seafola  and  Sifeca  are 
thus  perhaps  connected. 

For  further  notes  on  Sabene  see  Grimm's  Heldensage,  235 ;  Bugge,  H.D. 
passim. 

116.  Hea.\>oric.     Miillenhoff  (Z.f.d.A.  vr,  458)  suggested  that  this  hero  is 
the  O.E.  equivalent  of  the  Frederic  who  in  the  continental  German  versions  is 
murdered  by  his  father  Ermanaric.    But  this  is  a  quite  unnecessary  assumption, 
as  a  Freo\>eric  is  mentioned  below. 

Binz  (P.B.B.  xx,  208)  and  Schutte  (A.f.n.F.  xxi,  37)  would  identify  HeaXoric 
with  Heiftrekr,  the  ferocious  king  who  is  the  half-hero  of  the  Hervarar  Saga. 


220  Widsith 

117  Eadwine  sohte  ic  ond  Elsan,  ^Egelmund  ond  Hungar 
Eadwine  I  sought  and  Elsa,  JSgelmund  and  Hungar  and  the  proud 

But  the  two  names  do  not  correspond,  and  though  the  Old  English  one  may  be 
corrupted,  we  can  hardly  regard  this  as  more  than  a  probable  guess.  Schutte 
would  further  identify  Heaftoric-HeiSrekr  with  the  historic  Ardaricus  (Jordanes, 
ed.  Mommsen,  L).  Lappenberg  in  1838  had  suggested  "Heathoric  der  Haidreck 
von  Hunaland  im  Oddruasliede  [Oddriinargrdtr]  in  der  Edda  sein  kann"  (p.  181). 

See  also  Much  in  Z.f.d.A.  XLVI,  315. 

Sifecan.  Clearly  the  traitor  Sibich,  for  whom  see  Grimm,  Heldensage,  18, 19. 
Binz's  conjecture  seems  improbable.  See  Introduction,  p.  34,  footnote. 

Hli]>e.  Generally  identified  with  Leth,  the  third  king  of  the  Lombards. 
See  Introduction,  p.  122  (first  by  Lappenberg :  supported  by  Ettmuller  d)  25 ; 
Miillenhoff,  Z.f.d.A.  xi,  278;  Moller,  V.E.  11). 

It  was  pointed  out  however  by  Svend  Grundtvig  in  1856  that  Hlfye  and 
Incgen]>eow  probably  correspond  to  the  Hlgftr  and  Angantyr  of  the  Hervarar 
Saga.  (Danmarks  gamle  Folkeviser,  4°.  Kjobenhavn,  1856,  n,  637.)  Hloth  and 
Angantyr  are  half-brothers  and  foes ;  but  as  they  are  both  concerned  in  the 
great  fight  between  Goths  and  Huns  which  is  obviously  connected  with  the 
struggle  referred  to  in  11.  120-122,  they  naturally  have  a  place  here.  See 
Introduction,  pp.  46-48. 

Incgen]>eow.  If  this  is  Angantyr,  we  should  rather  expect  Onijerfyeow.  For 
the  present  form  however  compare  Ingceburne,  Incgeneeshdm  in  Kemble,  Codex 
Dipl.  813  (iv,  157),  593  (m,  127).  See  Ongend^eow,  above,  1.  31. 

117.  Eadwine  (Audoin)  and  JSgelmund,  below,  are  very  possibly  Lombard 
kings.  Moller  (V.E.  11)  regards  the  Lombard  passage  as  an  interpolation. 
This  seems  more  likely  than  that  it  points  to  a  contamination  of  Lombard  and 
Gothic  story,  centering  perhaps  in  the  person  of  Ealhhild-Swanhild.  See 
Introduction,  p.  122. 

Elsa.  Coming  between  Eadwine  and  JEgelmund,  Elsa  ought  to  be  the  name 
of  a  Lombard  hero,  and  it  is  frequently  asserted  that  it  is  (e.g.  by  Binz  in  P.B.B. 
xx,  206,  Lawrence  in  Mod.  Philol.  iv,  344).  For  this  there  is  no  evidence  except 
that  the  name  Alisso  occurs  in  a  charter  drawn  up  at  Beneventum  under 
Lombard  rule  in  (?)  752.  (See  Meyer,  Sprache  der  Langobarden,  1877,  p.  195  : 
Troya,  Codice  diplomatico  longobardo,  1852-54,  iv,  440,  No.  668.)  But  there  is 
no  proof  that  this  Alisso  was  a  Lombard  :  he  is  a  Condoma,  and,  whatever  that 
word  may  mean  (see  Ducange,  Condamina,  where  the  charter  is  quoted),  it  is 
clear  from  this  charter  alone  that  many  persons  of  this  status  were  not 
Lombards,  or  even  Germans.  Even  were  Alisso  a  Lombard,  it  does  not  follow 
that  he  was  named  after  an  early  Lombard  king  or  hero.  The  statement  that 
Elsa  is  a  Lombard  hero  is  therefore  unsupported  conjecture. 

On  the  other  hand  the  name  has  come  down  to  us  as  part  of  the  Gothic 
tradition  of  Dietrich  von  Bern,  in  whose  cycle  there  occur  two  heroes  of  the 
name  Else,  father  and  son  (Biterolfu.  Dietleib,  passim;  Dietrichs  Flucht,  8313). 
There  is  also  Elsan,  der  alte,  der  guote  to  whose  care  the  young  princes  are 
entrusted  in  the  Eabenschlacht,  and  who  has  to  atone  with  his  life  for  his 
neglect  of  his  charge.  Also  we  have  an  Elsung  in  the  Thidreks  Saga.  Evidence 
would  therefore  point  to  Elsa  being  a  Gothic  hero.  The  name  Elesa  however 
occurs  in  the  West  Saxon  pedigree  as  that  of  the  father  of  Cerdic  (for  a  dis 
cussion  of  the  name  see  Kemble,  Stammtafel  der  Westsachsen,  1836,  p.  27) : 
whilst  Alusa  occurs  in  the  allied  Northumbrian  pedigree,  as  given  in  the  early 
ninth  century  genealogies  (Sweet,  Oldest  English  Texts,  1885,  p.  170,  and  in 
Florence  of  Worcester,  ed.  Thorpe,  253).  See  Mullenhoff,  Beovulf,  63  ;  Grimm, 
Heldensage,  138,  192.  For  Alisso  see  Zacher,  Das  Gothische  Alphabet  Vulfilas, 
Leipzig,  1855,  p.  106 ;  for  a  possible  derivation  and  cognates  of  Aliso,  Elisa, 
Ihung  see  Miillenhoff,  Ein  Altsdchsische  Gott  Welo,  in  Nordalb.  Stud,  i,  36. 

jEgelmund.     See  Introduction,  pp.  121-3. 

Hungar.  Mullenhoff  (Z.f.d.A.  xi,  284)  would  identify  him  with  Onegesius, 
the  viceroy  of  Attila,  who  is  constantly  mentioned  in  Priscus'  account  of  his 


Text  (II  117-121)  221 

ond  ]?a  wloncan  gedryht         Wty-Myrginga. 
Wulfhere  sohte  ic  ond  Wyrmhere  :         ful  oft  J?ser  wig 

ne  alaeg, 

120  Jjonne  Hrseda  here        heardurn  sweordum 
ymb  Wistlawudu         wergan  sceoldon 

company  of  the  With-Myrgings.  Wulfhere  I  sought  and  Wyrmhere: 
there  full  oft  war  was  not  slack,  what  time  the  Goths  with  sharp  swords 
must  defend  their  ancient  seat  from  the  people  of  Mtla.  by  the  Vistula- 
wood. 

embassy  (see  Miiller,  Fragmenta  Hist.  Greec.  iv).  It  has  been  denied  that 
Onegesius  was  a  Goth.  Thierry  (Histoire  d'Attila,  nouvelle  e"dit.  1864,  p.  93) 
concludes  that  he  was  a  Greek,  whilst  Hodgkin  (Italy,  11,  74  note)  argues  that 
he  was  a  Hun,  and  orientalizes  his  name  into  Onegesh.  Oiiegesius  acts  as 
intermediary  and  apparently  as  interpreter  between  the  ambassadors  and  Attila. 
But  in  the  Acta  Sanctorum  (Parisiis,  1868,  July  29,  p.  81)  Attila's  interpreter 
Hunigasius  [sic,  not  Hunigaisus]  is  mentioned.  The  two  are  almost  certainly 
identical,  as  Hodgkin  admits  (n,  123).  But  Hunigaisus  is  a  purely  Gothic 
name,  and  corresponds  exactly  to  Hungar.  As  a  victorious  Gothic  leader  who 
had  overcome  the  Acatiri  (Priscus,  pp.  82-3,  86),  sitting  on  Attila's  right  in 
hall  (91),  fj.era  rbv  'A.rr-f)\o.v  irapb  ZtdjOais  Iff-^ixav  fjAya.  (85),  Hunigais  would  be 
very  likely  to  have  passed  into  Gothic  saga.  He  may  well  be  the  Hungar  here 
referred  to. 

118.  Wi\>- Myrginga.    wi%  Myrginga,  Kemble,  Leo,  "the  company  against 
the  Myrgings  " ;  winas  Myrginga,  Ettmuller  (j) ;  wine  Myrginga,  Ettmiiller  (2) ; 
Wi\>-Myrginga,  Thorpe  (Cod.  Ex.  and  Beowulf),  Kieger,  Grein,  Wiilcker  in  Kl. 
Dicht.,  Grein-Wiilcker,  Kluge,  Holt.,  Sedg.     Unless,  as  Heinzel  (Hervararsaga 
in  W.S.B.  xiv,  101)  suggests,  these  are  the  Lombards,  we  must  abandon  the 
name  as  inexplicable.     The  Lombards  might  possibly  have  been  also  called 
Myrgingas,  for  in  all  probability  they  occupied  Maurungani  and  its  neighbour 
hood  for  three  centuries  (from  the  middle  of  the  second  to  the  end  of  the  sixth), 
"hovering  about  the  skirts  of  the  Carpathians,  perhaps  sometimes  pressed 
northwards  into  the  upper  valleys  of  the  Oder  and  the  Vistula"  (Hodgkin, 
Italy,  v,  p.  102).     Mullenhoff  (Nordalb.  Stud,  i,  149)  interprets  Wfy-Myrginga, 
"Friends  of  the  Myrgings,"  i.e.  Lombards  [the  same  interpretation  had  been 
given  by  Ettmuller  u),p.  25].     Mullenhoff  comments,  "There  is  a  very  close 
connection  postulated  by  the  poem  between  the  Lombards  and  the  Myrgings." 
So  Gummere,  "  neighbor- Myrgings  "  (cf.  Moller  in  A.f.d.A.  xxu,  152). 

To  suppose  any  connection  with  the  Icelandic  Myrk-viftr  (as  Schutte, 
A.f.n.F.  xxi,  34,  37,  and  Sarrazin,  Engl.  Stud,  xxin,  236-7)  is  surely  impossible. 
We  should  expect,  if  anything,  the  O.E.  equivalent,  not  a  dislocated  Icelandic 
word.  But  see  also  Schutte,  Oldsagn,  63. 

Wulfhere.  Unknown,  although  both  Ermanaric  and  Theodoric  have,  in 
story,  retainers  whose  names  begin  with  Wolf.  Cf.  Biterolf  and  Alpharts  Tod, 
passim,  and  Wolfram  dietrich  in  the  Low  German  King  Ermanaric's  Death,  etc.', 
and  see  Grimm,  Heldensage,  238 ;  Symons  in  Z.f.d.Ph.  xxxvm,  161 ;  Matthaei 
in  Z.f.d.A.  XLVI,  55  ;  and  note  on  Wulfingum,  above  (1.  29). 

119.  Wyrmhere.     "Le  nom  Vyrmhere  re'pond  tout-a-fait  &  Ormarr  de  la 
Hervararsaga,  tout  comme  Gufthere,  en  ancien  allem.  Gundahari,   repond  & 
Gunnarr" — C.  C.  Bafn  in  Antiquites  russes,  Copenhague,  1850,  i,  112. 

This  identification  seems  fairly  certain,  and  supports,  and  in  its  turn  is 
supported  by,  the  interpretation  of  Hlfye  ond  Incgerifreow  as  Hlf&r  and  An- 
gantyr,  as  suggested  by  Svend  Grundtvig  and  Heinzel. 

120.  Hrceda.    Ettmuller,  Holt,  change  to  Hrefta,  unnecessarily,  cf.  Mullen 
hoff,  Z.f.d.A.  xn,  259,  and  see  Appendix  :  Note  H,  The  term  Hraedas  applied  to 
the  Goths. 

121.  Wistlawudu.    The  Goths  left  the  Vistula  towards  the  end  of  the 


222  Widsith 

ealdne  ebelstol         ^Etlan  leodum. 

Kaedhere    sohte    ic    ond    Rondhere,         Rumstan    ond 

Gislhere, 

Wtyergield  ond  Freoberic,         Wudgan  ond  Haman : 
125  ne  waeran  ]>cet  gesiba         ba  ssemestan, 

Not  the  worst  of  comrades  were  they,  though  I  am  to  mention  them 

second  century  A.D.  (Hodgkin's  Italy,  i,  40).  These  lines  therefore  preserve 
a  very  early  tradition,  but  we  can  draw  no  exact  chronological  argument  from 
the  allusion  except  that  we  are  here  dealing  with  saga  and  not  with  history. 
See  Introduction,  p.  163.  The  wood  is  probably  to  be  identified  with  the 
Mirkwood  which,  in  later  Icelandic  story,  separates  Goths  and  Huns. 

There  is  a  mark  in  the  Exeter  Book  over  the  a,  like  an  imperfectly  formed 
mark  of  length  :  it  is  quite  unlike  the  curved  heavy  horizontal  stroke  which 
signifies  n  or  m.  Mr  Anscombe's  suggestion  (Anglia,  xxxiv,  526)  that  this 
should  be  read  Wistlan  wudu  is  therefore  impossible.  Besides,  the  stroke  over 
the  word  is  never  used  in  the  Exeter  Book  for  n,  which  is  always  written  in 
full,  except  in  the  word  \>on  (\>onne),  and  in  Latin  words ;  the  stroke  is  fre 
quently  used,  but  in  all  other  cases  signifies  m. 

123.  Rcedhere  and  Rondhere.     Miillenhoff  (Z.f.d.A.  vi,  453)  would  connect 
them  with  the  Randolt  unde  Rienolt  who  are  mentioned  in  Biterolf,  together 
with  the  Harlungs  and  others,  as  retainers  of  Ermanaric  (5723,  4604  etc.), 
"  denn  die  namen  bedeuten  ganz  dasselbe."     Possibly  Bondhere  is  the  sarne 
hero  as  the  Bandver  who  in  the  Scandinavian  versions  is  Ermanaric's  son,  the 
equivalent  of  the  Frederic  of  the  southern  versions.     The  second  element  in 
proper  names  is  particularly  apt  to  be  corrupted.     See  Introduction,  p.  23. 

Rumstan.  Almost  certainly,  as  was  pointed  out  by  Lappenberg  (181)  and 
subsequently  by  Hertz  (Deutsche  Sage  im  Elsass,  Stuttgart,  1872,  p.  220),  the 
Bimstein  who  is  mentioned  in  Biterolf  as  a  retainer  of  Ermanaric,  and  more 
particularly  of  the  two  young  Harlungs  : 

—  Von  den  Harlungen 

Fritelen  dem  jungen 

unde  ouch  Imbrecken, 

den  volgeten  die  recken 

Wahsmuot  unde  Rimstein, 

ez  ween  der  tac  nie  beschein 

bezzer  wigande.  Biterolf,  10673-9  (cf.  4771)- 

The  name  also  occurs  in  the  Thidreks  Saga,  147-149,  where  Bimstein  is  a 
tributary  earl  of  jErminric  but  rebels  against  him.  Thithrek  gives  help  to 
.iErminric,  and  Vithga  (Wudga)  slays  Bimstein  in  a  sortie. 

Bassmann  in  his  translation  of  the  Thidreks  Saga  (Die  deutsche  Heldensage 
und  ihre  Heimat,  n,  459,  1863)  also  pointed  out  that  Bimstein  is  probably 
identical  with  our  Bumstan.  See  also  Grimm,  Heldensage,  3"  Aufl.,  Anhang, 
462  ;  Jiriczek(2)  79. 

Gislhere.     See  Introduction,  p.  65. 

124.  Wi\>ergield.    "  Withergield  ist  dem  Beowulfsliede  angehorig,"  Lappen 
berg  (181).     If  the  Withergyld  of  Beowulf  (2051)  is  the  name  of  a  hero  (as  it  is 
taken,  e.g.  by  Gering  and  Schiicking),  and  not  a  common  noun,  he  would  be  a 
leading  figure  in  the  combat  between  Danes  and  Heathobeardan,  presumably  a 
Heathobeard. 

Fre.o\eric.  Probably  the  Friderich  who  is  frequently  mentioned  in  Dietrich's 
Flucht,  son  of  Ermanaric,  who  is  at  last  destroyed  by  his  father.  (See  Intro 
duction,  p.  30,  note. )  There  is  however  another  Friderich,  a  retainer  of  Dietrich 
(Dietrich's  Flucht,  Rabenschlacht).  The  historic  prototype  of  one  or  both  of 
these  figures  is  probably  to  be  found  in  Frederic,  king  of  the  Bugians,  a 
picturesque  scoundrel  of  the  later  fifth  century,  who  first  joined  and  then 
deserted  Theodoric.  (See  Hodgkin's  Italy,  m,  164-209 ;  and  cf.  Matthaei  in 


Text  (tt.  122-139)  223 

J?eahJ?e  ic  hy  anihst         nemnan  sceolde. 

Ful  oft  of  bam  heape         hwinende  fleag 

giellende  gar         on  grome  J?eode : 

wrseccan  ]?ser  weoldan        wundnan  golde, 
130  werum  ond  wifum,         Wudga  ond  Hama. 

Swa  ic  ]>cet  symle  onfond  ||         on  bgere  feringe, 

bset  se  bib  leofast         londbuendum, 

se  ]>e  him  god  syle'5         gumena  rice 

to  gehealdenne,         benden  he  her  leofaS." — 
135  Swa  scribende         gesceapum  hweorfao" 

gleomen  guraena         geond  grunda  fela, 

bearfe  secgaS,         boncword  sprecab, 

simle  suS  o)?be  nortJ         sumne  gemetaS 

gydda  gleawne,         geofum  unhneawne, 

last.  Full  oft  from  that  company  flew  the  spear,  whistling  and  shrieking, 
against  the  hostile  folk.  Wudga  and  Hama,  wanderers  o'er  the  earth, 
ruled  there,  by  wounden  gold,  over  men  and  women. 

So  have  I  ever  found  it  in  my  journeying,  that  he  is  most  beloved  i 
to  the  dwellers  in  the  land,  to  whom  God  giveth  dominion  over  men  to 
hold  it  whilst  he  liveth  here." 

So  are  the  singers  of  men  destined  to  go  wandering  throughout  many 
lands :  they  tell  their  need,  they  speak  the  word  of  thanks :  south  or  north 
they  ever  meet  with  one,  skilled  in  songs,  bounteous  in  gifts,  who  desires 

Z.f.d.A.  XLIII,  326).  Jiriczek(2)  73  regards  the  identity  of  the  Freotheric 
mentioned  here  with  the  son  of  Ermanaric  as  certain.  But  it  is  hardly  so  : 
cf.  Panzer,  H.i.B.  78.  Yet  I  think  that  the  balance  of  probability  is  in  favour 
of  all  the  names  being  connected:  and  that  Widsith  records  a  stage  of  the 
tradition,  at  which  the  king  Frederic  of  history  has  come  to  be  regarded  as  a 
retainer  of  Ermanaric,  but  not  yet  as  his  son. 

126.  ic  hy  anihst.     ic  hivan  nyhst,  Leo,  Ettmiiller  (1).     "Obwohl  ich's 
Hausvolk   zunachst   nennen   musste "    (Ettmiiller).      Holt,   reads   aneist,   for 
metrical  reasons.     See  Introduction,  p.  173. 

127.  hwinende.     ctVa£  \ey6/j,et>oi>.     Cf.  O.N.  hwina. 

128.  giellende  gar.    Bugge  sees  an  imitation  of  this  line  in  Atlakvfya  15  : 
me\>  geire  gjallanda  at  vekja  gram  hilde.     See  P.B.B.  xxxv,  245,  and  H.  D.  tr. 
Schofield  xxiii ;  cf.  Neckel,  468,  note  4. 

129.  \<KV.     Where?    We  seem,  just  as  in  11.  50,  88,  to  have  a  reference  to 
something  not  explained  in  the  extant  poem.     This,  with  the  allusions  to 
Ealhhild  and  Scilling,  favours  the  view  that  either  Widsith  has  been  muti 
lated,  or  that  the  background  of  legend  was  so  familiar  as  to  render  the  most 
obscure  references  intelligible.     J>#r  may  perhaps  refer  to  the  stronghold  of 
Hama,  and  may  be  identical  with  the  byrhtan  byrig  to  which  in  Beowulf  he 
carries  off  the  Brosinga  mene. 

wundnan  golde.  Leo,  Ettmuller(i)  took  wundnan  golde  as  qualifying  Wudga 
and  Hama  "die  Wackern  walteten  da,  bewunden  mit  Golde."  So  Thorpe, 
Cod.  Ex.  But  wundnan  golde  is  instrumental ;  see  Introduction,  pp.  167, 
170. 

wundnan  was  altered  by  Kernble  (2)  to  wundum  [for  loundnum] ;  wundnum, 
Ettmiiller  d)  (note,  not  text),  Ettmiiller  (2)  text. 


224  Widsith 

140  se  Ipe  fore  dugu)?e  wile         dom  araeran, 
eorlscipe  sefnan,         o)>  )>aet  eal  scseceS, 
leoht  ond  lif  somod :         lof  se  gewyrceS, 
hafaS  under  heofonura         heahfaestne  dom. 

to  exalt  his  fame  before  his  chieftains — to  do  deeds  of  honour:  till  all 
departeth,  life  and  light  together :  he  gaineth  glory,  and  hath,  under  the 
heavens,  an  honour  which  passeth  not  away. 

131-4.  Miillenhoff  condemns  these  four  lines  as  an  interpolation  on  account 
of  their  silliness  (Z.f.d.A.  xi,  293,  4). 

symle  onfond.    onfond  symle,  Holt,  for  metrical  reasons. 

135-143.  Widsith's  discourse  is  ended,  and  these  nine  lines  form  an 
epilogue,  similar  to  the  nine  lines  of  prologue  prefixed  to  it.  Compare  the  way 
in  which  the  Wanderer's  discourse  is  fitted  with  a  Prologue  and  an  Epilogue. 
These  in  each  case  may  well  be  later  additions,  but  evidence  is  not  as  strong 
against  these  closing  lines  as  against  11.  1-9.  These  verses  are  somewhat 
commonplace,  but  not  faulty,  or  out  of  harmony  with  the  rest  of  the  poem. 
Cf.  Introduction,  p.  151. 

Miillenhoff  finds  them  "voll  Schwung  und  Erhabenheit"  (Z.f.d.A.  xi, 
293).  Moller  on  the  other  hand  finds  in  them  "einfachste  niichternheit " 
(V.E.  36). 

140.  fore  dugu\>e,  before  the  assembled  company.  Cf.  Juliana  256 ; 
Beowulf,  2020. 


APPENDIX. 

(A)  BIBLIOGRAPHY. 
(1)    PERIODICALS  AND  COLLECTIONS 

Aarbfyg&r  f.  nord.  Oldk.     Aarb0ger  for  Nordisk  Oldkyndighed  og  Historic. 

Kj0benhavn,  1866,  etc. 
Anglia.     Anglia,  Zeitschrift  fxir  Englische  Philologie,  herausgegeben  von 

R.  P.  Wiilcker  [Eugen  Einenkel].     Halle,  1878,  etc. 
A.f.d.A.    Anzeiger  fiir  deutsches  Alterthum.     Berlin,  1876,  etc.     (Z.f.d.A. 

xix  =  A.f.d.A.  I.) 
A.f.n.F.     Arkiv  for  nordisk  Filologi  udgivet  ved  G.  Storm  [A.  Kock]. 

Christiania,  1883,  etc. 

A.T.f.S.    Antiqvarisk  Tidskrift  for  Sverige.     Stockholm,  1863,  etc. 
(Herrig's)  Archiv.    Archiv  fur  das  Studium  der  neueren  Sprachen  und 

Litteraturen.     Elberfeld,  1846,  etc. 

Quoted  according  to  the  original  numbering. 
D.L.Z.     Deutsche  Literaturzeitung.     Berlin,  1880,  etc. 
E.E.T.S.    Early  English  Text  Society. 
Engl.  Stud.     Englische  Studien,  herausgegeben  v.  Eugen  Kolbing.     Heil- 

bronn,  1877,  etc. 
Eriu.     Eriu :  The  Journal  of  the  School  of  Irish  Learning,  Dublin.   Dublin, 

1905,  etc. 

Folk  Lore  :  a  quarterly  review.     London,  1890,  etc. 
Oermania.     Germania,  Vierteljahrsschrift  fiir  deutsche  Alterthumskunde. 

Wien,  1856-92. 
I.F.     Indogermanische  Forschungen,  herausgegeben  von  K.  Brugmann  u. 

W.  Streitberg.     Strassburg,  1891,  etc. 
J.d.  V.f.n.S.     Jahrbuch  des  Vereins  fiir"  niederdeutsche  Sprachforschung. 

Norden  u.  Leipzig,  1876,  etc. 
Langebek.     Scriptores  rerum  Danicarum,  collegit  J.  Langebek.     Hafniae, 

1772-1878. 
Litteraturblatt  f.  Philol.     Litteraturblatt  fiir  germanische  u.  romanische 

Philologie  herausg.  v.  O.  Behagel  u.  F.  Neuman.     Heilbronn,  Leipzig, 

1880,  etc. 

c.  15 


226  Widsith 

Mod.  Philol.     Modern  Philology.     Chicago.     University  of  Chicago  Press, 

1903,  etc. 
M.O.H.     Monumenta  Germaniae  Historica,  edidit  Societas  aperiendis  fon- 

tibus  rerum  Germanicarum  medii  aevi.    4°  Berolini  apud  Weidmannos, 

1877,  etc. ;  4°  Hannoverae,  1879,  etc. 
M.L.N.     Modern  Language  Notes.     Baltimore,  1886,  etc. 
M.L.R.     The   Modern   Language  Review,   ed.    by  John  G.   Robertson. 

Cambridge,  1906,  etc. 

Morsbachs  Studien.     Studien  zur  englischen  Philologie.     Halle,  1897,  etc. 
Nordalb.  Stud.     Nordalbingische  Studien,  6  Bde.     Kiel,  1844-54. 
P.B.B.     Beitrage  zur  Geschichte  der  deutschen  Sprache  und  Litteratur, 

herausgeg.  v.  Hermann  Paul  u.  Wilhelm  Braune.    Halle  a.  S.,  1874,  etc. 
Pauls  Ordr.  d).     Grundriss  der  germanischen  Philologie,  herausgegeben 

von  Hermann  Paul.     Strassburg,  1889,  etc. 

Pauls  Ordr.  (2).     [The  same],  zweite  Auflage.     Strassburg,  1896,  etc. 
Pertz  (fol.).     Monumenta  Germaniae  Historica,  edidit  G.  H.  Pertz.     Fol. 

Hannoverae,  1826,  etc. 

Q.F.     Quellen  u.  Forschungen  zur  Sprach-  und  Culturgeschichte  der  ger 
manischen  Volker,  herausgegeben  von  B.  ten  Brink  und  W.  Scherer. 

Strassburg,  1874,  etc. 
W.S.B.     Sitzungsberichte  der  k.  Akad.   der  Wissenschaften  zu  Wien. 

Phil. -hist.  Classe.     Wien,  1850,  etc. 
Z.f.d.A.     Zeitschrift  fur  deutsches  Alterthum  [und  deutsche  Literatur], 

herausgegeben  von  Moriz  Haupt  [K.  Mullenhoff,  E.  Steinmeyer,  etc.]. 

Leipzig,  Berlin,  1841,  etc. 
(Zacher's)  Z.f.d.Ph.     Zeitschrift  fur  deutsche  Philologie,  begriindet  von 

Julius  Zacher.    Halle,  1869,  etc. 

(2)   EDITIONS  OF  WIDSITH  (IN  CHRONOLOGICAL  ORDER). 

CONYBEARE,  Illustrations.     Illustrations  of  Anglo-Saxon  poetry,  by  J.  J. 

Conybeare,  ed.  by  his  brother,  W.  D.   Conybeare.      London,  1826. 

pp.  10-27,  Text,  Notes,  Latin  Translation  and  English  paraphrase. 
KEMBLE,  Beowulf.     The  Anglo-Saxon  Poems  of  Beowulf,  the  Traveller's 

Song  and  the   Battle    of   Finnes-Burh,   ed.   by  John   M.   Kemble. 

London,  1833.     pp.  221-233,  Text. 

Kemblds  Text  is  reproduced  in  Latham's   Germania  of  Tacitus, 

London,   1851.     KemblJs  second  edition  (1835)   differs  considerably 

from  his  first. 
GUEST,  Rhythms.     A   History  of   English   Rhythms,  by  Edwin   Guest. 

2  vols.     London,  1838.     pp.  78-93,  Text  and  English  Translation. 
LEO,  Sprachproben.     Altsachsische  und   Angelsachsische  Sprachproben, 

herausgeg.  und  mit  einem  erklarenden  Verzeichniss  der  angelsachs- 

ischen  Worter  versehen  von  Heinr.  Leo.     Halle,  1838.      pp.  75-85, 

Text,  Translation  and  Notes. 


Appendix  227 

ETTMULLER  (t).    Scopes  vldsidh.    Sangers  Weitfahrt.     ^Edhelstans  Sieg 

bei   Brunanburg.     Angelsachsisch   und  deutsch   von   L.   Ettmiiller. 

Zurich,  1839. 
THORPE,  Cod.   Ex.     Codex   Exoniensis.     A  collection  of  Anglo-Saxon 

Poetry,  ed.  by  Benj.  Thorpe.     London,  1842.      pp.  318,  etc. 

Thorpe's   Translation  is  reproduced   in   Latham's    Oermania   of 

Tacitus,  1851. 
EBELING.    Angelsachsisches  Lesebuch  von  F.  W.  Ebeling.    Leipzig,  1847. 

pp.  97-101. 
SCHALDEMOSE.     Beo-Wulf  og  Scopes  WidsitS,  to  angelsaxiske  digte,  med 

overssettelse  og  oplysende  anmserkninger  udgivne  af  F.  Schaldemose. 

Kj^benhavn,  1847,  second  edit.  1851.     pp.  176-188. 
KLIPSTEIN.     Analecta  Anglosaxonica.     Selections,  in  prose  and  verse, 

from  the  Anglo-Saxon  Literature,  by  Louis   F.  Klipstein.     2  vols. 

New  York,  1849.     Vol.  n :  Text,  299-307  ;  Notes,  422-430. 
ETTMULLER  (2).     Engla  and  Seaxna  Scopas  and  B&ceras.     Anglo-Saxonum 

poetae  et  scriptores  prosaici,  ed.  L.  Ettmullems.     Quedlinburgii  et 

Lipsiae,  1850.     pp.  208-211. 
THORPE,  Beowulf.      The  Anglo-Saxon  Poems  of  Beowulf,  the  Scop  or 

Gleeman's  Tale  and  the  Fight  at  Finnesburg.     With  a  literal  transla 
tion,  notes,  glossary,  etc.,  by  Benj.  Thorpe.   Oxford,  1855.    pp.  215-227. 
MULLER,  Angelsachsisches  Lesebuch.     c.  1855.     22.    Des  Sangers  Reisen. 
/  have  not  seen  this  edition,  which  was  privately  printed.     There  is 

no  copy  in  the  British  Museum,  nor,  apparently,  in  any  of  the  German 

University  libraries. 
GREIN,  Bibliothek.     Bibliothek  der  angelsachsischen  Poesie,  in  kritisch 

bearbeiteten  Texten  und  mit  vollstandigen  Glossar  herausgeg.  von 

C.  W.  M.  Grein.     4  Bde.     Gottingen,  1857.     pp.  251-255. 
RIEGER,  Lesebuch.    Alt-  und  angelsachsisches  Lesebuch  nebst  altfriesischen 

Stucken  mit  einem  Wb'rterbuche  von  Max  Rieger.     Giessen,   1861. 

pp.  57-61. 
WULCKER,  Kleinere  Dichtungen.     Kleinere  angelsachsische   Dichtungen, 

versehen  von  R.  P.  Wulcker.     Halle,  1882.     pp.  1-6. 
MOLLER,  V.  E.     Das  altenglische  Volksepos  in  der  urspriinglichen  stro- 

phischen  Form,  von  Hermann  Moller.     Kiel,  1883.     pp.  1-39,  i-vi. 
GREIN- WULCKER.       Bibliothek  der  angelsachsischen   Poesie,   begriindet 

von  C.  W.  M.  Grein,  neu  bearbeitet  von  R.  P.  Wulcker.     3  Bde. 

Cassel,  1883,  etc.     Vol.  I,  pp.  1-6. 
KLUGE,   Lesebuch.     Angelsachsisches    Lesebuch,    zusammengestellt    von 

Friedrich  Kluge.     2te  Auflage.     Halle,  1897.     pp.  123-126. 
HOLT.      Beowulf,    nebst    den    kleineren    Denkmalern    der    Heldensage, 

herausgeg.  von  F.  Holthausen.     2te  Auflage.     Heidelberg,  1908-9. 

Text  of  Widsith  in  vol.  I  :  Bibliography  and  notes  in  vol.  n. 
SEDG.     Beowulf,  ed.  by  W.  J.  Sedgefield.     Manchester,  1910. 
Text  of  Widsith,  pp.  139-142. 

15—2 


228  Widsith 

Comments  or  translations  without  text  will  be  found  in 

LAPPENBERG.    [A  review  of  Leo's  Sprachproben  appeared  in  the]  Jahrbiicher 

fur  wissenschaftliche  Kritik,  August,  pp.  169-182,  by  J.  M.  Lappen- 

berg.     Berlin,  1838,  n. 
MiiLLENHOFF  in  Nordalb.  Stud.     Die  deutschen  Volker  in  Nord-  und 

Ostsee  in  altester  Zeit.     In   Nordalbingische  Studien,  Kiel,   1844, 

I,  111-174. 
MULLENHOFF  in  Z.f.d.A.     Zur  Kritik  des  angelsachsischen  Volksepos.    2. 

Widsith.     In  Z.f.d.A.,  xi,  275-294. 
SCHIPPEE  in  Oermania.     Zum  Codex  Exoniensis  von  J.  Schipper.    In 

Germania,  xix,  327-339  (especially  333). 
GUMMERE  d).     Widsith,  a  translation,  with  brief  commentary,  in  Modern 

Language  Notes,  iv,  419  etc.  (1889). 

MORLEY'S  English   Writers  contains  a  translation  into  blank  verse :   re 
printed  in  Cook  and  Tinker's  Select  Translations,  Boston,  1902. 
VOGT,  Beowulf.     Beowulf,  iibersetzt  von  Paul  Vogt.     Halle,  1905. 

pp.  100-103  give  a  useful  abstract  of  Widsith,  with  commentary. 
LAWRENCE  in  Mod.  Philol.     Structure  and  interpretation  of  Widsith,  by 

W.  W.  Lawrence.     In  Modern  Philology,  iv,  1906,  pp.  329-374. 
SCHUTTE,  Oldsagn,  1907,  contains  a  translation  of  Widsith  into  Danish. 
GUMMERE (2).    The  Oldest  English  Epic.    Beowulf... Widsith,  translated 

by  F.  B.  Gummere.     New  York,  1909. 

SLEBS.     WfdsfS.     In  Festschrift  Wilhelm  Vietor.     Marburg,  1910. 
ANSCOMBE.    Widsith.    In  Anglia,  xxxiv,  pp.  526-7. 

(3)  Other  O.E.  poems  have  been  quoted  from  the  edition  of  Grein-Wulcker. 
Holder's  Beowulf  (1899)  has  also  been  used.  Editions  of  other  works 
frequently  quoted  are : 

ABELING.      Das    Nibelungenlied    und    seine   Literatur.      Leipzig,    1907. 

(Teutonia  7.) 
AGATHIAS.     Agathiae    Historiarum    libri   quinque ;    B.   G.    Niebuhrius 

recensuit.      Bonnae,   1828.      In  the  Corpus   Scriptorum   Historiae 

Byzantinae. 

ANDERSON.    The  Anglo-Saxon  Scop,  1903.    (Univ.  of  Toronto  Studies.) 
Antiquite's  Russes.    Antiquite's  Russes  [edited  by  C.  C.  Eafn,  etc.'].    Copen 
hagen,  1850.     Published  by  the  Kongeligt  Nordisk  Oldskrift-Selskab. 
BARNOUW.     Textcritische  Untersuchungen.     Leiden,  1902. 
BEDE,  H.E.,   ed.   Holder.      Bedae    Historia    Ecclesiastica,    ed.    Holder. 

Freiburg,  1882.     Holder's  Germanische  Bucherschatz,  7. 
BEDE,  H.E.,  ed.  Plummer.     Venerabilis  Bedae  Historiam  Ecclesiasticam 

...Historiam  Abbatum...recog.  C.  Plummer.     2  torn.     Oxonii,  1896. 
BINDING.      Die   burgundisch-romanische    Konigreich,  von    C.   Binding. 

Leipzig,  1868. 


Appendix  229 

BINZ  in  P.B.B.     Zeugnisse  zur  germanischen  Sage  in  England,  von  Q. 

Binz.     In  P.B.B.  xx,  141-223  (1895). 
BIRCH,  Cart.   Sax.      Cartularium   Saxonicum,  a  collection   of  charters 

relating  to  Anglo-Saxon    history,  by  W.  de   Gray  Birch.      3  vols. 

London,  1885-93. 

BLUHME.     Die  Gens  Langobardorum  und  ihre  Herkunft.     Bonn,  1868. 
BOER,  Ermanarich.     Die  Sagen  von  Ermanarich  und  Dietrich  von  Bern 

von    R.   C.    Boer.      Halle,    1910.     Zachers    Germanistische    Hand- 

bibliothek,  x. 
BOTTGER.     Diocesan  u.    Gaugrenzen    Norddeutschlands  v.   H.   Bb'ttger. 

4  Bde.     Halle,  1875-6. 

IV,  214-17,  224-9  particularly  helpful. 
BRANDL  in  Pauls  Ordr.  (2).     Geschichte  der  altenglischen  Literatur  von 

Alois  Brandl.    Strassburg,  1908.     In  Pauls  Grundriss,  n,  1. 
BRANDL  in  Archiv.     Zur  Gotensage  bei  den  Angelsachsen.     In  Herrigs 

Archiv,  cxx  (1908),  pp.  1-8. 
BREMER  in  Pauls  Grdr.  (2).     Ethnographie  der  germanischen  Stamme  von 

Otto   Bremer.      In   Pauls   Grundriss,   in,   735-950  (Abschnitt  xv). 

This  section  is  to  be  found  in  the  second  edition  only. 
BUGGE,  H.D.     Helge-Digtene  i  den  aeldre  Edda  :  deres  hjem  og  forbindelser, 

af  Sophus  Bugge.     Kj0benhavn,  1896. 
BUGGE  tr.  Schofield.     [A  revised  translation  of  the  above.]    London, 

1899. 
C.P.B.     Corpus  poeticum  boreale  :  the  poetry  of  the  old  Northern  tongue, 

edited  by  Gudbrand  Vigfusson  and  F.  York  Powell.     2  vols.     Oxford 

1883. 
CASSIODORUS,     Variae.      Cassiodori    Senatoris    Variae,    recensuit    Th 

Mommsen.    Berolini,  1894.    In  the  Monumenta  Germaniae  Historica, 

Auct.  Ant.  xii. 

CHAD  WICK.     The  origin  of  the  English  Nation.     Cambridge,  1907. 
CHADWICK  in  Camb.  Hist.     "  Early  National  Poetry "  in  the  Cambridge 

History  of  English  Literature,  vol.  I,  chap,  ill  (pp.  19-40). 
Chronicle,  ed.  Plummer.     Two  of  the  Saxon  Chronicles  parallel,  edited  by 

Charles  Plummer  on  the  basis  of  an  edition  by  John  Earle.     2  vols. 

Oxford,  1892-99.      See   particularly  notes  on   the   Genealogies,  n, 

pp.  1-6. 
CLARK.     Sidelights  on  Teutonic  History  during  the  Migration   Period. 

Cambridge,  1911. 
DAHLMANN.     Forschungen  auf  dem  Gebiete  der  Geschichte.     Altona, 

1822. 
Danmarks  Riges  Historic.     Danmarks  Riges  Historic  af  Joh.  Steenstrup, 

etc.,  I.     Kj0benhavn,  1897-1904. 
Edda,  ed.  Symons  and  Gering.     Die  Lieder  der  Edda,  herausgegeben  von 

B.  Symons  und  H.  Gering.     2  Bde.     Halle  a.  S.,  1888,  etc.     Zachers 

Germanistische  Handbibliothek,  vn. 


230  Widsifh 

Edda,  ed.  Better  and  Heinzel.     Saemundar  Edda,  mit  einem  Anhang 
herausgegeben  und  erklart  von  F.  Detter  u.  R.  Heinzel.      2  Bde. 
Leipzig,  1903. 
ERDMANN  in  A.  T.f.S.    Om  folknamnen  Gotar  och  Goter,  af  Axel  Erdmann. 

In  A.T.f.S.,  xi,  4. 

ERDMANN.    tfber  die  Heimat  und  den  Namen  der  Angeln  von  A.  Erdmann 
in  the   Skrifter  utgifna  af    Humanistiska  Vetenskapssamfundet   i 
Upsala,  I,  1890. 
FAHLBECK  in  A.T.f.S.     Beovulfsqvadet  sasom  kalla  for  nordisk  forn- 

historia  af  Pontus  Fahlbeck.      In  A.T.f.S.,  vm,  2. 
Fornaldar  Sqgur,  ed.  Rafn.     Fornaldar  SQgur  Nordrlanda  eptir  gginlum 
Handritum  utgefnar  af  C.  C.  Rafn.     Kaupmannaho.fn,  1829.     Bd  I 
contains :     pp.    1-109,    Saga    Hrolfs    Konungs    Kraka ;    pp.    113- 
234,  Vglsunga    Saga ;    pp.   409-533,   Hervarar   Saga   ok    Heidreks 
Konungs. 
FORBTEMANN.     Altdeutsches  Namenbuch.     2  Bde.     2te  Auflage.     Bonn, 

1900. 
GERING.    Beowulf,  ubersetzt  u.  erlautert  von  H.  Gering.     Heidelberg, 

1906. 

Germania,  ed.  Church  and  Brodribb.  The  Germania  of  Tacitus,  with  a 
revised  text,  English  notes,  and  map,  by  A.  J.  Church  and  W.  J. 
Brodribb.  London,  1903. 

Germania,  ed.  Holder.     Cornelii  Taciti  de  origine  et  situ  Germanorum 
liber,  ed.  A.   Holder.     Freiburg,  1882.      In  Holder's  Germanischer 
Biicherschatz. 
Germania,  ed.  Latham.     The  Germania  of  Tacitus,  with  ethnological 

dissertations  and  notes.     London,  1851. 
GIBBON,  ed.  Bury.     The  History  of  the  Decline  and  Fall  of  the  Roman 

Empire,  edited  by  J.  B.  Bury.     7  vols.     London,  1896-1900. 
GOLTHER.     Handbuch  der  germanischen  Mythologie.     Leipzig,  1895. 
GREGORII  Hist.  Franc.     Historia  Francorum,  ed.  Arndt.      Hannoverae, 
1885.     In  the  Monumenta  Germaniae  Historica :    Scriptores  rerum 
Merovingicarum,  i;  Gregorii  Turonensis  opera. 

GRIMM,  Heldensage.  Die  deutsche  Heldensage  von  Wilhelm  Grimm. 
Gottingen,  1829.  Second  edition,  revised  by  Miillenhoff,  Berlin,  1867  ; 
third  edition,  a  reprint  of  the  first,  revised  by  R.  Steig,  Gutersloh, 
1889. 

References  to  the  first  edition,  the  pagination  of  which  is  noted  in 
the  margin  of  the  third. 

GRIMM,  D.M.  Deutsche  Mythologie,  von  Jacob  Grimm.  Gottingen, 
1835.  Second  edit.,  Gottingen,  1844  ;  third,  Gottingen,  1854  ;  fourth, 
revised  by  Meyer,  3  vols.,  Weimar,  1875.  Teutonic  Mythology, 
translated  from  the  fourth  edition,  with  notes  and  appendix  by 
J.  S.  Stallybrass.  4  vols.  London,  1879. 

References  to  the  first  edition,  and  to  Stallybrass'  translation. 


Appendix  231 

GRIMM,  G.D.S.    Qeschichte  der  deutschen  Sprache,  von  Jacob  Grimm. 

Leipzig,  1848.    Second  edit.,  1853 ;  third,  revised  by  Mullenhoff,  1867  ; 

fourth,  1880. 

References  to  the  first  edition,  the  pagination  of  which  is  noted  in 

the  margin  of  the  fourth. 
GRIMM,  R.A.     Deutsche   Rechtsalterthiimer.     Gottingen,   1828.     Fourth 

edition,  Leipzig,  1899. 

References  to  the  first  edition,  the  pagination  of  which  is  noted  in 

the  margin  of  the  fourth. 
HAIGH,  Sagas.     The  Anglo-Saxon  Sagas ;  an  examination  of  their  value  as 

aids  to  history,  by  Daniel  H.  Haigh.     London,  1861. 
Heimskringla  af  Snorri  Sturluson,  udg.  ved  F.  Jonsson.     4  vols.     K0ben- 

havn,  1893-1901. 
HEINZEL,  Hervararsaga  in  W.S.B.     Ueber  die  Hervararsaga,  von  Richard 

Heinzel.   In  the  Sitzungsberichte  der  philosophisch-historischen  Classe 

der  k.  Akademie  der  Wissenschaften  zu  Wien,  Bd  cxiv,  417  (1887). 
HEINZEL,    Ostgotische    Heldensage    in    W.S.B.      Ueber    die    ostgotische 

Heldensage,  in  the  same,  Bd  cxix,  Abth.  3. 
HEINZEL  in  A.f.d.A.     Das  altenglische  Volksepos,  von  Hermann  Moller. 

[A   review  by   Richard    Heinzel]    in    the   Anzeiger    fiir    deutsches 

Alterthum  x,  215-33. 

Heldenbuch.     Deutsches  Heldenbuch.     5  Bde.    Berlin,  1866-70. 
HEUSLER,  L.u.E.     Lied  und  Epos  in  germanischer  Sagendichtung,  von 

Andreas  Heusler.     Dortmund,  1905. 
HEYNE-SCHUCKING.     Beowulf  herausgeg.  v.  M.  Heyne.     Neunte  Auflage 

bearbeitet  von  L.  L.  Schiicking.     Paderborn,  1910. 
Historia  Brittonum,  ed.  Stevenson.     Nennii  Historia  Britonum,  recensuit 

Josephus  Stevenson.     Londini,  1838. 
Historia  Brittonum,  ed.  Mommsen  in  N.G.H.     Historia  Brittonum  cum 

additamentis  Nennii,  in  Mommsen's  Chronica  Minora  saec.  iv,  v,  vi, 

vn.     Berolini,  1898  (Mon.  Ger.  Hist.). 
HODGKIN,  Italy.     Italy  and  her  Invaders,  by  Thomas  Hodgkin.     Second 

edit.     7  vols.     Oxford,  1892,  etc. 
HOOPS,    Waldbaume.    Waldbaume  und  Kulturpflanzen  im  germanischen 

Altertum,  von  Johannes  Hoops.     Strassburg,  1905. 
Hoops    Reallexikon.      Reallexikon    der    germanischen    Altertumskunde. 

Strassburg,  1911. 

Bd.  I,  Lief.  1  (A — BA)  so  far  published. 

JAHN.     Die  Geschichte  der  Burgundionen.     2  Bde.     Halle,  1874. 
JIRICZEK  d).     Die  deutsche  Heldensage,  von  0.  L.  Jiriczek.     3te  Auflage. 

Leipzig,  1906.     Sammlung  Goschen,  32. 
JIRICZEK  (2).     Die  deutsche  Heldensage,  von  0.   L.  Jiriczek.    Vol.  i. 

Strassburg,  1898. 

Vol.  I  deals  with  the  stories  of  Weland,  Ermanaric,  and  Theodoric 

of  Verona. 


232  Widsith 

JORDAN.     Die  Heimat  der  Angelsachsen,  in  the  Verhandlungen  der  49 

Versammlung  deutscher  Philologen,  Basel,  1907,  pp.  138-140. 
JORDANES,   ed.   Holder.     lordanis   de  origine  actibusque  Getarum,   ed. 

Holder.       Freiburg,     1882.       In    Holder's    Germanischer    Biicher- 

schatz,  5. 
JORDANES,  ed.  Mommsen.     lordanis  Romana  et  Getica,  ed.   Theodoras 

Mommsen.    Berolini,  1882.    In  the  Monumenta  Germaniae  Historica, 

Auct.  Ant.  v,  1. 

Unless  otherwise  stated  references  are  to  the  Getica. 
KEMBLE'S  Saxons.     The  Saxons  in  England,  by  J.  M.  Kemble.     2  vols. 

London,  1849. 

KER,  Epic  and  Romance.  London,  1896. 
KER,  The  Dark  Ages.  Edinburgh,  1904. 
KOCK,  Ynglingar.  Om  Ynglingar  sasom  namn  pa  en  svensk  konungaatt 

in  the  Historisk  Tidskrift  (Stockholm),  1895. 
KOEQEL,  Ltg.    Geschichte  der  deutschen  Litteratur  bis  zum  Ausgange 

des  Mittelalters,  von  Rudolf  Koegel,  1, 1, 1894 ;  i,  2, 1897.    Strassburg. 

Particularly  1,96-175;  n,  191-219. 
Kudrun,  ed.  Martin  (2).     Kudrun,  herausgegeben  und  erklart  von  Ernst 

Martin.     Zweite  Auflage.      Halle,   1902.      Zachers  Gennanistische 

Handbibliothek. 
LAPPENBERG,  Geschichte.    Geschichte  von  England,  von  J.  M.  Lappenberg. 

2  Bde.     Hamburg,  1834. 

LAPPENBERG,   trans.   Thorpe.      History  of   England  under  the  Anglo- 
Saxon  kings,  translated  from  the  German  of  Dr  J.  M.  Lappenberg 

by  Benjamin    Thorpe,   with    additions... by   the   author.      London, 

1844-5. 
MEYER.     Altgermanische    Religionsgeschichte   von    Richard    M.   Meyer. 

Leipzig,  1910. 

MOGK  in  Pauls  Grdr.  (2).     Mythologie,  in  Grundriss,  in,  230-406. 
MORLEY'S  English    Writers.      English  Writers.     An  attempt  towards  a 

history  of  English  Literature,  by  Henry  Morley.     14  vols.     London, 

1887-95.     Particularly  vol.  n,  pp.  1-40. 
MUCH  \\\' P.B.B.     "Die  Siidmark  der  Germanen,"  "Die  Germanen  am 

Niederrhein,"  "  Goten  und  Ingvaeonen,"  von  Rudolf  Much.     In  Paul 

u.  Braunes  Beitrage,  xvn,  1-225  (1893). 
MUCH.     Deutsche  Stammeskunde,   von   R.   Much.     2te  Aufl.     Leipzig, 

1905. 
MULLENHOFF,  Beovulf.    Beovulf.    Untersuchungen  iiber  das  angelsachs- 

ische  Epos  und  die  alteste  Geschichte  der  germanischen  Seevolker, 

von  Karl  Miillenhoff.     Berlin,  1889. 

MULLENHOFF,  D.A.K.  d).     Deutsche  Altertumskunde,  von  Karl  Miillen 
hoff.     Berlin,  1870,  etc. 
MULLENHOFF,  D.A.K.  (2).    [Second  edition,  revised  by  Max  Roediger.] 

Berlin,  1890,  etc. 


Appendix  233 

MULLENHOFF  in   Nordalb.  Stud.     Die  deutschen  Volker  an  Nord-   und 

Ostsee  in  altester  Zeit.     In  Nordalbingische  Studien,  i  (1844),  111. 
MULLENHOFF,  Z.E.,  or  MULLENHOFF  in  Z.f.d.A,   xn.     Zeugnisse  und 

Excurse  zur  deutschen  Heldensage  von  Karl  Miillenhoff.      In  the 

Z.f.d.A.  xii,  253  etc.,  413  etc.     Subsequent  additions  by  0.  Jaenicke, 

Z.f.d.A.  xv,  310  etc. 
MULLER.      Mythologie    der    deutschen    Heldensage,    von    W.    Miiller. 

Heilbronn,  1886. 

NECKEL.     Beitrage  zur  Eddaforschung.     Dortmund,  1908. 
Nibelungen  Lied.    Der  Nibelunge  N6t,  herausg.  von  Karl  Bartsch.    2  Bde. 

Leipzig,  1870-6. 
OLRIK,  Heltedigtning.    Danmarks  Heltedigtning,  en  Oldtidsstudie  af  Axel 

Olrik,   i  Rolfkrake  og  den  seldre   Skjoldungraekke,  II  Starkad  den 

Gamle.     K0benhavn,  1903,  1910. 
OLRIK,  Sakses  Oldhistorie.    Sakses  Oldhistorie,  af  Axel  Olrik.    Kj0benhavn, 

1892-4. 

Pt  1  appeared  in  the  Aarbfyger  for  Nor  disk  Oldkyndighed,  n,  7,  1 ; 

Pt  2  separately. 
PANZER,   H.G.     Hilde-Gudrun.     Eine  sagen-  und  literargeschichtliche 

Untersuchung.     Halle,  1901. 

PANZER,  H.i.B.     Deutsche  Heldensage  im  Breisgau.     Heidelberg,  1904. 
PANZER,   Beowulf.     Studien  zur  germanischen   Sagengeschichte  von  F. 

Panzer,     i  Beowulf.     Munchen,  1910. 
PAULUS.     Pauli  Historia  Langobardorum,  ed.  L.  Bethmann  et  G.  Waitz. 

Hannoverae,  1878.     In  the  Monumenta  Germaniae  Historica — Scrip- 
tores  rerum  Langobardicarum  et  Italicarum  saec.  vi-ix. 
PLINY,  Nat.  Hist.     C.  Plini  Secundi  naturalis  historiae  libri  xxxvn  post 

Ludovici  obitum  edidit  C.  Mayhoff.     Lipsiae  (Teubner),  1906. 
PROCOPIUS.     Procopius  ex  recensione  G.  Dindorfii.    3  torn.    Bonnae,  1833. 

In  the  Corpus  Scriptorum  Historiae  Byzantinae. 
PTOLEMY,  ed.  Miiller.     Cl.  Ptolemaei  geographia,  recognovit  C.  Miillerus. 

Vol.  i.     Parisiis,  1883  (Tabulae,  1901). 
RAJNA.     Le  Origini  dell'  Epopea  francese.     Firenze,  1884. 
RASSMANN.     Die  deutsche  Heldensage.     2te  Ausgabe.     Hannover,  1863. 

Contains  a  German  translation  of  the  Thidreks  Saga. 
RICHTER.     Chronologische  Studien  zur  angelsachsischen  Literatur.     Halle, 

1910.     (Morsbachs  Studien,  xxxin.) 
RIEGER  in  Z.f.d.A,     Ingavonen,  Istavonen,  Herminonen  von  Max  Rieger. 

In  the  Z.f.d.A.  xi,  177-205. 
ROEDIGER.     Die  Sage  von  Ermenrich  u.   Schwanhild.     In  Weinhold's 

Zeitschrift  des  Vereins  fiir  Volkskunde,  I,  1891,  pp.  242  etc. 
SARRAZIN  in  Engl.  Stud.     Neue  Beowulfstudien,  xxm,  221-67  ;   xxxv, 

19  etc. ;  XLII,  1-37.     See  also  xxiv,  144-5. 
SAXO,  ed.  Holder.     Saxonis  grammatici  Gesta  Danorum,  herausgegeben 

von  Alfred  Holder.     Strassburg,  1886. 


234  Widsith 

SAXO,  tr.  Elton.     The  first  nine  books  of  the  Danish  History  of  Saxo 

Grammaticus,  translated  by  Oliver  Elton.     London,  1894.     Publica 
tions  of  the  Folk  Lore  Society,  xxxni. 
SCHUCK.     Folknamnet  Geatas  i  den  fornengelska  dikten  Beowulf.    Upsala, 

1907. 
SCHUTTE  in  A.f.N.F.     Gudmund  Schiitte — Anganty-Kvadets  Geografi. 

In  the  Arkiv  for  Nordisk  Filologi,  xxi,  30-44. 
SCHUTTE,  Oldsagn.    Oldsagn  om  Godtjod,  med  saerligt  henblik  pa  Folke- 

stamsagn.     Kj0benhavn,  1907. 

SEARLE.     Onomasticon  Anglosaxonicum.     Cambridge,  1897. 
SEEBOHM.     Tribal  Custom  in  Anglo-Saxon  Law.     London,  1902. 
SEELMANN  in  J.d.  V.f.n.S.     Abhandlungen  zur  Geschichte  der  deutschen 

Volksstamme   Norddeutschlands   und    Danemarks.      In    the   Jahr- 

buch  des  Vereins  fiir  niederdeutsche  Sprachforschung,   xu,   1886, 

pp.  1-93. 
SNORRA  Edda.     Snorri   Sturluson,  Edda  udgiven   af   Finnur  J6nsson. 

K0benhavn,  1900. 

STOPFORD  BROOKE,  Early  Eng.  Lit.     The  History  of  Early  English  Litera 
ture,  by  Stopford  A.  Brooke.     2  vols.     London,  1892.     Particularly 

Vol.  I,  Chapters  i  and  vi,  and  Appendices  A  and  B. 
SYMONS  in   Pauls   Ordr.  (2).      Heldensage,   von   B.   Symons.     In   Pauls 

Grundriss,  vol.  in,  pp.  606-734. 
TEN  BRINK,  Beowulf.      Beowulf.      Untersuchungen   von   Bernhard  ten 

Brink.     Strassburg,  1888.     (Q.F.  62.) 

A  review  of  Ten  Brink's  Beowulf,  by  H.  Holler,  will  be  found  in 

Englische  Studien,  xni,  247. 
TEN  BRINK,  in  Pauls  Ordr.  d).     Altenglische   Litteratur.      Particularly 

pp.  510-608  of  vol.  n,  pt.  1  of  the  first  edition. 
Thidreks  Saga.     Saga  DiSriks  konungs  af  Bern,  i  Norsk  bearbeidelse  fra 

det  trettende  Aarhundrede  efter  Tydske  Kilder.     Udgivet  af  C.  R. 

Unger.     Christiania,  1853. 
Thidreks  Saga.     piSriks  Saga  af  Bern,  udgivet  ved  H.  Bertelsen.     K0ben- 

havn,  1905,  etc. 

References  to    Unger's  edition.      Unger's  numbering  is  given  (in 

brackets')  in  Bertelsen. 
UHLAND,  Schriften.     Schriften  zur  Geschichte  der  Dichtung  und  Sage,  von 

Ludwig  Uhland.     8  Bde.     Stuttgart,  1865-73. 
Vglsunga  Saga,  ed.  Wilken.     Die  prosaische  Edda,  im  Auszuge,  nebst 

Vglsunga   Saga   und    Nornagests-thattr,  herausgegeben    von    Ernst 

Wilken.     Paderborn,  1877-83. 
WAITZ.     Forschungen  zur  deutschen   Geschichte.     I.     Der  Kampf  der 

Burgunder  u.  Hunen.     Gottingen,  1862. 
WEILAND.    Die  Angeln.    Ein  Capitel  aus  der  deutschen  Alterthumskunde 

von  L.  Weiland.    Sonderabdruck  aus  der  Festgabe  fur  Georg  Hanssen. 

Tubingen,  1889. 


Appendix  235 

WEYHE  in  EngL  Stvd.    Konig  Ongentheows  Fall.     In  Engl.  Stud,  xxxix, 

14-39. 
WULKER,  Ordr.     Grundriss   zxir  Geschichte  der  Angelsachsischen   Lit- 

teratur.     Leipzig,  1885.     Particularly  pp.  244-346:  Angelsachsische 

Heldendichtung. 
ZEUSS.      Die    Deutschen    und    die    Nachbarstamme,    von    K.    Zeuss 

Miinchen,  1837. 


(B)    "MAURUNGANI"  AND  THE   "GEOGRAPHER  OF 

RAVENNA." 

The  "  geographer  "  divides  the  points  of  the  compass  into  twenty-four 
hours,  twelve  northern  (of  the  night),  and  twelve  southern  (of  the  day). 
Following  this  arrangement,  we  have  first  the  land  of  the  Germans 
(Franks)  with  Britain  beyond :  then  the  land  of  the  Frisians,  then  of 
the  Saxons,  then  of  the  Northmen  or  Danes,  with  the  Elbe  country  in 
front  (of  old  called  Maurungani),  Then  come  the  Scridefinni,  then  Scythia. 
We  have  thus  travelled  through  six  hours,  i.e.  ninety  degrees.  The  text 
runs : 

Prima  ut  hora  noctis  Germanorum  est  patria  quse  modo  a  Francis 
dominatur.  ..cujus  post  terga  infra  Oceanum  praedicta  insula  Britania.... 
Secunda  ut  hora  noctis  ex  parte  ipsa  Germania  vel  FrixonumDorostates 
est  patria... Tertia  ut  hora  noctis  Saxonum  est  patria... Quartaut  hora 
noctis  Northomanorum  est  patria,  quse  et  Dania  ab  antiquis  dicitur, 
cujus  ad  frontem  Alpes  [read  Albes]  vel  patria  Albis  :  Maurungani 
certissime  antiquitus  dicebatur,  in  qua  Albis  patria  per  multos  annos 
Francorum  linea  remorata  est,  et  ad  frontem  ejusdem  Albis  Datia 
minor  dicitur,  et  dehinc  super  ex  latere  magna  et  spatiosa  Datia 
dicitur,  quse  modo  Gipidia  ascribuntur,  in  qua  nunc  Unorum  gens 
habitare  dinoscitur....Quinta  ut  hora  noctis  Scirdifrinorum  vel 
Rerefenorum  est  patria.  Sexta  ut  hora  noctis  Scytharum  est 
patria,  unde  Sclavinorum  exorta  est  prosapia1. 

The  second  mention  of  [?  Maur~]ungani  comes  in  Chapter  iv,  §  18, 
between  the  description  of  Saxony  (§  17)  and  Pannonia  (§  19). 

Item  ad  partem  quasi   meridianam,   quomodo  a    spatiosissima 

dicatur  terra,  est  patria  quse  dicitur  Albis  [ Jungani,  montuosa 

per  longum,  quasi  ad  orientem  multum  extenditur,  cujus  aliqua  pars 
Baias  dicitur.... Haec  patria  habet  non  modica  flumina,  inter  cetera 
fluvius  grandis  qui  dicitur  Albis  et  Bisigibilias  sexaginta  quse  in 
Oceano  funduntur. 

Baias  is   apparently   Bohemia.     For    the    unintelligible    Bisigibttias 

1  Ravennatis  anonymi  cosmographia,  ed.  Finder  and  Parthey,  Berolini,  1860, 
pp.  27,  28  (§  i,  11). 


236  Widsiih 

sexaginta  it  has  been  proposed  to  read  Visurgi  et  alia  sexaginta. 
Miillenhoff  supposes  it  to  be  a  corruption  of  Bisila  and  Biaduas,  the 
Vistula  and  the  Oder.  (See  his  Beovulf,  p.  100.) 

The  derivation  of  Mauringa,  Maurungani  must  remain  xinsettled.  It 
may  mean  the  swampy  moor  land,  from  a  root  connected  with  O.H.G.  mios, 
English  moss  and  mire  (quite  distinct  from  English  moor1}.  Other  sug 
gestions  have  been  made,  but  they  are  mere  guesses.  Thus  it  is  proposed 
to  derive  the  name  from  the  root  maur,  an  ant,  on  the  following  grounds  : 
Mauringa  was  in  historic  times  left  desert  by  its  inhabitants  :  they  must 
have  left  the  land  because  they  were  uncomfortable,  and  presumably  over 
crowded,  the  land  was  therefore  called  derisively  "  the  ant  heap"2. 
Heinzel,  after  weighing  this  etymology  and  finding  it  wanting3,  proposes 
one,  if  possible,  even  more  far-fetched.  The  Burgundians,  according  to  a 
Roman  historian,  knew  themselves  to  have  been  of  old  of  Roman  stock4  : 
hence  perhaps  they  were  of  darker  hue  than  the  West  Germanic  folk5. 
Now  the  Burgundians  lived  at  one  time  east  of  the  Elbe  ;  hence  the  land 
east  of  the  Elbe  may  have  been  inhabited  by  darker  people,  and  hence  have 
derived  its  name  from  the  Latin  Maurus,  a  Moor,  assuming  this  word  to 
have  been  early  known  in  Germany — for  which  evidence  is  lacking. 


(C)    EASTGOTA. 

Against  the  historical  existence  of  Ostrogotha  may  be  urged : 

(1)  His  name,  which  looks  mythical  and  eponymous,  like  King  Dan  of 
the  Danes,  Hwicca  of  the  Hwicce. 

(2)  The  lack  of  satisfactory  contemporary  evidence. 

But  (1)  On  the  other  hand,  we  should  expect  Ostrogotha,  if  eponymous, 
to  come  at  the  head  of  the  pedigree.  Only  his  having  been  an  historical 
character  can  account  for  his  name  coming  so  far  down  in  the  list.  We 
cannot  pronounce  a  German  chief  mythical  because  his  name  seems 
strangely  appropriate  to  his  career.  It  was  intended  that  it  should  be 
so,  when  he  was  named.  The  names  Airmanareiks,  Alareiks,  Thiudareiks, 
Gaisareiks  exactly  fit  the  conquerors  who  bore  them.  An  heir  to  the 
throne,  born  perhaps  when  national  feeling  was  running  high,  might 
well  have  been  named  The  Ostrogoth.  Theodoric  named  one  of  his 

1  Zeuss  (p.  472),  Bluhme  (p.  23),  and  Miillenhoff  (Nordalb.  Stud,  i  140-41) 
suggested  this  meaning  :  but  they  wished  to  connect  with  moor  (O.H.G.  muor), 
which  is  linguistically  impossible.     See  Miillenhoff,  D.A.  u,  97  ;  Beovulf,  102  ; 
Bruckner,  107  ;  and  cf.  Ettmiiller  d)  11. 

2  This  etymology  was  hinted  at  by  Miillenhoff,  D.A.  97,  and  has  been 
seriously  adopted  by  Kossinna. 

8  Ostgotische  Heldewage,  24. 

4  Ammianus,  xxvin,  5,  11. 

5  A  most  perilous  assumption  :  for  even  if  the  Burgundians  did  boast  of 
a  Roman  origin,  there  is  no  reason  for  thinking  that  there  was  more  ethno 
graphical  truth  in  this  than  in  the  Trojan  origin  of  the  British. 


Appendix  237 

daughters  Ostrogotho1.  An  historic  Gepid  prince  was  named  Ostrogothus2, 
which  is  more  difficult  to  account  for. 

(2)  Whilst  Jordanes  and  Cassiodorus  are  late  in  date,  they  are 
remarkably  consistent  in  their  notice  of  Ostrogotha.  Reckoning  back 
the  generations  of  the  Amal  pedigree,  we  should  expect  to  find  him 
where  we  actually  do  meet  him,  about  the  middle  of  the  third  century. 

There  seems  then  every  reason  to  accept  Ostrogotha  as  an  historical 
figure;  and  this  has  been  done  without  demur  by  Gibbon3,  Dahn4, 
Miillenhoff6  and  Hodgkin6. 

Schiitte,  Oldsagn,  152-3,  should  however  be  compared. 


(D)    THE  JUTES. 

Ttum  \weold]  Oefwulf, 

Ytum  =  Early  West  Saxon  letum,  corresponding  to  which  the  Anglian 
or  Kentish  form  would  be  Eotum,  lotum.  These  Yte,  Iotas,  Eote,  Ytan 
(corresponding  to  a  Prim.  Germ.  Eutiz,  Eutjoz,  Eutjaniz)  are  identical 
with  the  lutae,  luti  whom  Bede  mentions  as  conquering  and  colonizing 
Kent,  the  Isle  of  Wight,  and  the  adjacent  parts  of  Hampshire.  This  is 
shown  by  the  fact  that : 

(1)  The  words   Ytena  (Corpus,  Camb.,  MS.),  Eota  (Bodleian,  Cotton, 
Corpus  Oxf.,  and  Camb.  Univ.  MSB.)  are  used  to  render  lutarum  in  the 
Old  English  version  of  Bede's  History,  iv,  16,  ea  (gens)  quce  usque  hodie  in 
prouinda  Octidentalium  Saxonum  lutarum  natio  nominatur,  posita  contra 
ipsam  insulam  Vectam. 

(2)  The  neighbourhood  of  the  New  Forest  was  known  as  Ytene  [i.e. 
Ytena  land]  till  at  least  the  twelfth  century.     Florence  of  Worcester 
speaks  of  William   Rufus  as  having  been  slain  in  Nova  Foresta  quce 
lingua  Anglorum  Ytene  nuncupatur,  and  again  in  prouinda  Jutarum  in 
Nova  Foresta   (Florentii   Wigorn.    Chron.,   ed.   Thorpe,   II,  45 ;   I,  276). 
Traces   of  the  name  are  perhaps  to  be  found  in    Ytingstoc  (Bishop's 
Stoke    near    Southampton — Birch,    Cart.    Sax.    in,    1054 ;    cf.   Binz   in 
P.B.B.,  xx,  185).     It  is  clear,  then,  that  the  Hampshire  Jutae  were 
known  as  Yte  (or  perhaps  Ytas,   Ytan)  :   and  we  have  Bede's  evidence 
that  these  were  the  same  race  as  the  Kentish  folk  (i,  15). 

(3)  lotum,  lutna  is  used  to  translate  lutis,  lutarum  in  the  passage 
inserted  in  the  A.-S.  Chronicle  (derived  from  Bede,  i,  15). 

On  the  other  hand,  in  the  O.E.  Bede,  lutarum  in  I,  15  is  translated  by 

1  Jordanes,  ed.  Mommsen,  cap.  Lvni. 

2  QiHTTplyorOos.     Procopius,  Bell.  Gott.  iv,  27. 

3  i,  245.     Gibbon  does  not  mention  Ostrogotha  by  name,  but  accepts  as 
historical  Jordanes'  account  of  the  campaign. 

4  Konige  der  Germanen,  u,  1861,  p.  54 ;   Allgemeine  Deutsche  Biographie, 

XXIV. 

5  Z.f.d.A.  ix,  136.  6  Italy,  i,  48. 


Widsiih 

Geata,  which  has  led  to  the  theory  that  the  Jutlanders  and  the  Jutish 
conquerors  of  England  are  to  be  identified  with  the  Geatas  of  Beowulf. 
Fahlbeck,  who  holds  this  view,  supposes  the  name  Tte  to  be  derived  from 
Vecta,  and  to  have  been  merely  the  name  adopted  by  the  Jutish  settlers 
in  the  Isle  of  Wight  and  on  the  adjoining  coast  :  it  was  only  later,  he 
thinks,  that  the  word  Yte  came  to  be  regarded  as  synonymous  with  all 
Jutae,  and  thus  became  applicable  also  to  the  Kentishmen  (see  Fahlbeck, 
Beovulfsqvadet,  46-48).  This  theory  is  hardly  tenable ;  we  should  have 
to  locate  Gefwulf  and  his  Yte  in  England,  and  attribute  to  the  catalogue 
of  kings  in  Widsith  a  date  and  character  quite  different  from  that  to  which 
all  the  other  evidence  points.  For  the  kings  in  this  catalogue  all  belong 
to  the  continental  hero  cycles  of  the  fourth  to  the  sixth  centuries,  not  to 
the  insular  English  cycles  of  the  seventh.  The  Yte  of  Widsith  are  almost 
certainly  a  continental  people,  as  is  shown  by  their  being  grouped  with 
Wsernas,  Eowan  and  Frisians. 

Fahlbeck's  view  is  unsatisfactory,  for  it  is  based  upon  one  passage  in 
the  O.E.  Bede,  where  Jutarum  is  rendered  Geata,  whilst  it  is  refuted  by 
the  other  passage  in  the  O.E.  Bede,  by  the  Chronicle,  and  by  Florence, 
where  Jutarum  is  translated  by  Ytena,  or  its  Anglian  or  Kentish  equiva 
lent,  Eota,  lotna.  Of.  too  Schiick,  16-18. 

We  may  accept,  then,  as  fairly  certain,  the  identification  of  the  Yte, 
Eotas,  with  the  lutae  of  Bede.  They  are  probably  also  identical  with  the 
Eutii,  Euthiones  who  are  mentioned  as  having  made  some  kind  of  sub 
mission  to  the  Frankish  kings 1  in  the  sixth  century.  That  these  Frankish 
references  are  to  the  Yte  dwelling  on  the  English  side  of  the  channel, 
rather  than  to  those  who  remained  in  their  original  continental  home,  has 
been  suggested  by  Weiland  (p.  36)  and  Bremer  (Zachers  Z.f.d.Ph.  xxv, 
130),  and  is  quite  likely. 

Where  this  original  continental  home  was  situated  is  not  so  clear. 
Bede  places  the  old  Anglian  country  inter  provincial  lutarum  et  Saxonum 
(i,  15),  he  must  therefore  have  regarded  the  lutae  as  dwelling  north  of 
Angel,  i.e.,  in  the  modern  Jutland.  It  has  been  urged  by  Jessen 
(Undersfigelser  til  Nordisk  Oldhistorie,  K0benhavn,  1862,  55),  Moller 
(V.E.  88;  A.f.d.A.  xxn,  159),  Weiland  (36),  Mullenhoff  (Beovulf,  98), 
and  more  recently  by  Siebs  (Pauls  Grdr.  (2)  I,  1158)  and  Heuser 
(Review  of  Biilbring  in  the  Anzeiger  to  the  Indogermanische  Forschungen, 
xiv,  1903,  26-30),  that  the  character  of  the  Old  Kentish  dialect  makes 
Bede's  statement  incredible,  and  that  Old  Kentish  dialectal  peculiarities 

1  '...subactis  Thoringiis . . . cum  Saxonibus,  Euciis,  qui  se  nobis  voluntate 
propria  tradiderunt.'  Letter  of  Theudebert  to  Justinian,  Epistolae  Merowingici 
Aevi,  i,  133  in  M.G.H.  (between  A.D.  534  and  547). 

Quern  Geta,  Vasco  tremunt,  Danus,  Euthio,  Saxo,  Britannus 

Cum  patre  quos  acie  te  domitasse  patet. 

Venantius  Fortunatus  in  praise  of  Chilperic,  about  the  year  580.     See  Car- 
minum  nc,  1,  73,  ed.  Leo,  in  M.G.H.  Auct.  Ant.  iv,  1881. 


Appendix  239 

would  lead  us  to  look  for  the  original  home  of  Hengest's  warriors  rather 
in  Friesland  than  in  Jutland1.  This  assertion  as  to  the  close  connection 
between  Kentish  and  Frisian  has  grown  to  be  a  dogma.  (See  however  to 
the  contrary  Chadwick  (67)  and  Bjorkman  in  Engl.  Stud,  xxxix,  1908, 
361.)  The  matter  needs  investigation,  but  the  coincidences  between 
Kentish  and  Frisian  have  certainly  been  exaggerated,  and  seem  insufficient 
without  further  corroboration  to  invalidate  Bede's  statement. 

It  has  further  been  objected  that  any  connection  between  fte,  Eotas, 
lutae,  on  the  one  hand,  and  Old  Norse  Jotar  (Jutlanders,  the  luti  of 
Saxo),  is  phonetically  impossible  (Moller  V.E.,  88).  But  this  objection 
arises  from  the  assumption  that  the  original  name  began  with  a  j.  This 
should,  of  course,  be  dropped  in  Scandinavian  and  represented  by  a  g  in 
Old  English  (cf.  Goth,  juggs,  Icel.  ungr,  O.E.  geong).  It  was  however 
pointed  out  by  P.  A.  Munch  as  long  ago  as  1848  that  the  Old  Norse 
Jotar,  as  well  as  the  O.E.  forms,  can  both  be  traced  back  to  a  primitive 
form  beginning  not  with  Ju  but  with  Eu,  and  that  the  evidence  of 
Latin  writers  is  that  this  was  the  original  form. 

Admitting  this,  Moller  urges,  as  a  last  objection  (private  communication 
quoted  by  Kossinna,  I.F.  vn,  293)  that  at  any  rate  the  modern  Danish 
form  Jyder,  if  a  pure  Danish  word,  must  go  back  to  a  form  in  J  such  as 
*Jeutiones :  it  could  only  come  from  a  form  *Eutiones  if  it  were  a  North 
Frisian  loan  word.  Undue  weight  seems  to  have  been  attached  to  this 
objection  :  for  ex  hypothesi  the  mod.  Danish  Jyder  would  not  be  a  pure 
Danish  word,  and  the  objection  therefore  falls  to  the  ground.  For  it  is 
not  argued  that  Bede's  lutae  were  racially  identical  with  the  modern 
Jutlanders,  who  are  of  Scandinavian  stock:  but  only  that  the  latter 
adopted  their  name  from  the  earlier  "Anglo-Frisian"  inhabitants  of 
Jutland,  whose  country,  after  the  emigration  of  Hengest  to  England, 
they  settled,  and  the  remnants  of  whom  they  assimilated.  On  the  Danish 
development  of  the  word,  see  Jordan,  139. 

Assuming,  then,  that  the  original  name  of  the  tribe  was  Eutiz  (or 
Eutjds,  Eutjaniz)2,  we  should  get  in  the  West  Germanic  dialects  through 
the  influence  of  the  front  vowel  in  the  second  syllable,  lutiz,  etc.  (cf. 
Wright,  Primer  of  Gothic,  §  61).  In  Bede's  time  the  lu  would  still  be 
preserved  in  Northern  English  (cf.  Sievers,  Zwr  Geschickte  der  ags. 
Diphthonge,  in  P.B.B.  xvni,  411-416),  and  he  would  write,  quite 
correctly,  lutae.  lutiz  would  give  Anglian  'Eote,  West  Saxon  lete,  Yte; 
whilst,  on  Mailer's  own  showing,  the  Scandinavian  tribes,  borrowing  the 

1  The  holders  of  this  view  admit  the  possibility  of  the  Hampshire  men, 
of  whose  original  dialect  we  know  nothing,  having  come  from  Jutland ;  they 
only  deny  that  the  Kentish  men  can  have  done  so  (Moller,  V.E.  88,  footnote : 
Miillenhoff,  Beovulf  98).  Jessen  argues  that  the  settlers  of  the  Isle  of  Wight 
were  of  Scandinavian  stock. 

a  Ten  Brink  (204)  and  Stevenson  (167)  are  probably  right  in  supposing  the 
word  an  i-stem.  Much  (P.B.B.  xvn,  208)  suggests  a  jo-stem,  Munch  an 
n-stem.  Euciis,  Tie,  point  to  an  i-stem  :  Euthio,  Ytena  to  an  n-stem.  Perhaps 
both  existed  side  by  side,  cf.  Seaxan  and  Seaxe,  Miercna  and  Mierce. 


Widsith 

name  from  West  Germanic  sources,  would  naturally  alter  it  to  O.N.  Jotar, 
Danish  Jyder. 

To  sum  up.  (1)  There  is  no  sufficient  ground  for  doubt  that  the  Yte 
are  identical  with  Bede's  luti,  lutae,  the  conquerors  of  Kent,  and  with 
the  Eutii,  Euthiones  indicated  by  continental  authorities. 

(2)  Holler's  attempt  to  prove  that  the  original  tribal  name  underlying 
all  these  later  forms  cannot  be  identical  with  that  from  which  the  name  of 
Jutland  is  derived  has  not  succeeded.  As  to  the  original  home  of  these 
Yte,  we  are  then  left  on  the  one  hand  with  Bede's  statement  that  they 
dwelt  north  of  the  Angles,  and  on  the  other  with  the  contention  that 
the  close  similarity  between  the  Old  Kentish  dialect  and  the  Frisian 
speech  would  lead  us  to  put  the  ancestors  of  the  Kentish  men  in  the 
closest  proximity  to  Friesland.  But  in  the  fifth  century  dialects  hardly 
distinguishable  may  well  have  been  spoken  on  all  the  North  Sea  coast, 
from  Friesland  to  Jutland.  Our  knowledge  of  the  mutual  relations  of 
these  tribes  and  of  their  dialects  is  too  imperfect  for  us  to  argue  with 
certainty. 

The  subject  is  one  on  which  agreement  will,  in  all  probability,  never 
be  reached.  The  English  historian,  impressed  with  Bede's  reliability,  will 
probably  continue  to  repeat  his  statement,  without  any  doubt  or  hesitation 
(cf.  e.g.  Sir  James  Eamsay's  Foundations  of  England,  1898,  1, 120).  Many 
philologists,  on  the  other  hand,  will  probably  continue  to  believe  that 
linguistic  evidence  makes  Bede's  statement  incredible.  Other  philologists, 
however,  have  accepted  it ;  e.g.  Zeuss  (501),  Grimm  (Gf.D.S.,  738),  Ten 
Brink  (Beowulf,  204),  Much  (in  P.B.B.  xvn,  209),  Bremer  (in  Pauls 
Grdr.  (2)  in,  856),  Biilbring  (Altenglisches  Elementarbuch,  1902,  5). 
Stevenson,  in  his  edition  of  Asser,  1904  (pp.  166-70),  seems  doubtful, 
and  doubt  has  been  more  strongly  expressed  by  Sarrazin  (Beowulf- 
Studien,  28)  and  Erdmann  (Heimat  der  Angeln,  40) l.  Among  those 
who  have  argued  against  Bede's  location  of  the  lutae  in  Jutland, 
mention  should  be  made,  in  addition  to  the  references  to  Jessen, 
Moller,  Mullenhoff,  Weiland,  Siebs,  and  Heuser,  given  above,  to 
Kossinna's  Ethnologische  Stellung  der  Ostgermanen  in  I.F.,  vu,  276,  etc. 

The  question  cannot  be  settled,  because  it  depends  upon  the  relative 
weight  of  two  quantities  difficult  to  determine,  (1)  Bede's  reliability  in 
dealing  with  events  which  occurred  more  than  two  centuries  before  his 
birth,  (2)  the  extent  to  which  we  are  justified  in  arguing,  granting  the 
disputed  similarity  of  Kentish  and  Frisian  in  historic  times,  that  four 
centuries  before  those  times  the  ancestors  of  these  peoples  must  necessarily 
have  been  immediate  neighbours.  To  the  present  writer  it  seems  that, 
whilst  the  evidence  upon  which  Bede  based  his  statement  that  the  lutae 

1  Cf.  also  Erdmann,  Om  folknamnen  Gotar  och  Goter,  in  the  A,T,f.S.  xi,  4, 
19-24. 


Appendix  241 

dwelt  north  of  the  Angles  may  have  been  insufficient,  the  evidence  by 
which  it  is  sought  to  refute  this  statement  indubitably  is  insufficient,  and 
that  Bede's  statement  accordingly  holds  the  field. 

Those  who  would  make  the  Jutes  originally  neighbours  of  the  Frisians 
are  not  agreed  whether  to  put  them  on  the  north-eastern  border  (Siebs  in 
Pauls  Grdr.  (2)  i,  1157)  or  on  the  south-west,  in  the  Netherlands  (Holier, 
Heuser).  Hoops'  suggestion  that  the  Jutes  may  have  come  from  Jutland 
in  the  first  instance,  but  may  have  settled  temporarily  in  the  Netherlands 
(  Waldbaume,  585),  is  an  ingenious  compromise,  which  derives  considerable 
support  from  the  fact  that  there  is  some  evidence  that  the  Angles  and 
Saxons  attacked  Britain  from  such  temporary  settlements  in  the  Nether- 
lauds1.  (See  Note  E  :  The  original  homes  of  the  Angli.) 


(E)     THE    ORIGINAL   HOMES  OF  THE  ANGLI  AND  VARINI 
(ENGLE  AND  \\OERNAS). 

The  current  view,  that  the  original  home  of  the  Angles  is  to  be  sought 
in  and  around  the  modern  Schleswig,  rests  upon  the  assertion  of  Bede2 
that  the  Angles  came  from  Angel,  and  the  apparently  independent,  because 
slightly  dissimilar,  statement  of  Alfred.  The  A.S.  Chronicle,  Ethelwerd, 
and  William  of  Malmesbury,  depend  upon  Bede  ;  but  the  reference  to  the 
Insula  Oghgul  in  the  Hisioria  Brittonum  is  probably  independent  and 
corroborative.  As  has  been  pointed  out  above,  it  is  clear  that  the 
Widsith  poet  regards  the  Angles  as  a  people  dwelling  in  the  neighbour 
hood  of  Schleswig.  For  the  poem  makes  Offa  king  of  Ongel  defend  his 
frontier  at  Fifeldor — the  river  Eider.  If  it  can  be  proved  that  the  Angles 
came,  not  from  the  neighbourhood  of  Schleswig,  but  from  the  interior  of 
Germany,  then  we  must  abandon  any  belief  in  Widsith  as  in  the  main 
early  or  authoritative,  although  we  might  still  hold  that  it  incorporated 
early  fragments. 

It  was  Zeuss  who  first  dismissed  the  connection  of  the  Angles  with 
Angel  as  a  piece  of  false  etymology,  resting  upon  the  gossip  of  sailors. 
Zeuss  placed  the  home  of  the  Angles  on  the  lower  Saale3.  To  this  con 
clusion  he  was  led,  partly  by  the  many  undoubted  traces  of  the  existence 
of  Anglian  or  kindred  tribes  in  the  Saale  neighbourhood4,  and  partly  by 

1  In  a  discussion  of  the  Jutes  it  is  better  to  leave  out  of  the  question 

(1)  the  Eudoses  of  Tacitus.     These  may  be  identical  with  the  Eutii,  lutae, 
Yte  (as  Miillenhoff  supposed,  Nordalb.  Stud,  i,  112-119,  though  he  afterwards 
abandoned  the  view).     But  if  they  are,  the  d,  Eudoses,  not  Eut-,  remains  in 
explicable. 

(2)  the  *Eotenas  mentioned  in  the  Finnesburh  lay  in  Beowulf.    Holder, 
in  his  Beowulf  (128),  and  others  have  wished  to  connect  these  with  the  Eotas- 
lutae.     But  this  needs  investigation. 

2  See  above,  p.  74.  8  p.  496. 

4  Since  strengthened  :  cf.  Bremer  in  P.B.B.  ix,  579. 

o.  16 


242  Widsith 

the  desire  which  he  often  betrays  of  making  his  geography  square  with 
that  of  Ptolemy1.  In  view  of  the  authority  of  Zeuss,  whose  work  on  early 
German  geography  is  still  what  Kemble  declared  it  to  be — indispensable — 
and  of  the  fact  that  the  most  elaborate  investigation  of  the  origin  of  the 
Angles,  that  of  Axel  Erdmann2,  endorses  his  view,  it  ought  not  to  be 
assumed  without  investigation  that  the  location  of  King  Offa  given  in 
Widsith  is  necessarily  correct. 

As  to  the  arguments  which  led  Zeuss  to  place  the  Angles  in  the  centre 
of  Germany :  it  is  certain  that  there  was  a  settlement,  on  the  Saale,  in 
the  neighbourhood  of  the  modern  Merseburg  and  Leipzic,  of  a  people  at 
any  rate  closely  akin  to  the  Angles,  speaking  a  dialect  similar  to  that  of 
the  Angles  and  Frisians.  The  Merseburg  Glosses3  written  down  at  the 
beginning  of  the  eleventh  century,  and  still  preserved  in  the  Cathedral 
library  at  Merseburg,  show  traces  of  the  "  Anglo-Frisian  "  peculiarities. 
So  do  the  forms  of  the  German  proper  names  adopted  by  the  local 
chronicler,  Dietmar  von  Walbeck,  whose  history,  compiled  about  the 
same  time  that  the  glosses  were  written,  and  extant  in  a  MS.  partly 
written,  partly  revised,  by  himself,  is  valuable  evidence  as  to  the 
dialect  of  the  district  in  the  10th  century.  Further,  the  old  names  of 
the  districts,  JEngelin,  Werinofeld,  near  Merseburg,  point,  not  merely  to 
a  general  "  Anglo- Frisian  "  element  in  the  population,  but  to  the  settle 
ment  here,  on  the  borders  of  Thuringia,  of  bodies  of  Angles  and  Varini. 
In  two  places  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Leipzic  the  name  Wernsdorf  survives 
to  this  day*. 

But  whilst  admitting  this  settlement  of  Anglo-Frisian  people  in  the 
inland  districts,  it  would  require  the  very  heaviest  evidence  before  we 
could  agree  with  Zeuss  and  Erdmann  in  making  this  the  original  home  of 
the  Angles,  from  which  they  conquered  England.  Such  a  theory  is,  we 
have  seen,  opposed  to  the  express  evidence  of  Bede,  Alfred,  and  the 
Historia  Brittonum.  To  make  the  Angles  an  inland  people  is  also 
opposed  to  the  evidence  of  Tacitus,  who  makes  them  share  in  the 
worship  of  Nerthus  on  an  isle  of  the  ocean;  as  well  as  to  the  evidence 
of  Beowulf,  which  places  Offa  I  betwixt  the  seas,  be  seem  tweonum.  Zeuss' 
theory  is  indeed,  if  we  may  say  so  without  disrespect  to  the  memory  of  so 
great  a  scholar,  contrary  to  common  sense.  To  give  a  radius  of  over  two 
hundred  miles  to  the  area  of  marsh  and  forest  which  had  to  be  covered  by 
the  car  of  the  goddess  Nerthus  is  surely  grossly  to  over-estimate  the  powers 

1  Cf.  Miillenhoff's  criticism  of  Zeuss  in  the  Nordalb.  Stud,  i,  112. 

2  Ueber  die  Heimat  und  den  Namen  der  Angeln,  Upsala,  1890.     So  too 
Steenstrup  in  Danmarks  Riges  Historie,  i,  76-77. 

8  Edited  by  H.  Leyser  in  the  Z.f.d.A.  in,  280;  and  again  by  Bezzenberger, 
Z.f.d.Ph.  vi,  291.  Heyne  (Kleiners  Altniederdeutsche  Denkmaler)  first  noticed 
the  close  dialectal  resemblance  of  Dietmar's  proper  names  to  the  glosses ;  and 
Bremer  (P.B.B.  ix,  579)  first  identified  the  dialect  as  "Anglo-Frisian."  See  also 
Seelmann,  Thietmar  von  Merseburg,  die  Merseburger  Glossen  und  das  Merse- 
burger  Totenbuch,  in  J.d.V.f.n.S.  xn,  89. 

4  Schroder,  Lehrbuch  der  deutschen  Rechtsgeschichte,  3to  Auf.  1898,  p.  244. 


Appendix  243 

of  the  primitive  Germanic  cow.  Besides,  it  seems  incredible  that  the  men 
who  sailed  across  the  North  Sea  to  conquer  England  should  have  come, 
not  from  the  opposite  coast,  but  from  a  district  more  than  two  hundred 
miles  inland.  Erdmann  seeks  to  surmount  this  last  difficulty  by  sup 
posing  that  the  Angles  may  have  been  accustomed  to  use  the  Elbe  for 
communication  (pp.  23-31).  But  can  example  be  found  anywhere  of  an 
inland  folk,  even  if  settled  upon  a  great  river,  having  chosen  the  calling  of 
sea-robbers?  Erdmann1  quotes  the  Heruli  with  their  ravaging  of  the 
Aegean  and  Euxine  coast.  But  this  is  not  parallel,  for  whatever  be  the 
origin  of  the  Heruli,  they  were  probably  in  the  first  place  a  sea  folk5'.  The 
nearest  instance  would  be  that  of  Gaiseric  and  his  Vandals.  They  were 
certainly  landsmen,  yet,  after  their  conquest  of  Carthage,  they  made  them 
selves  dreaded  throughout  the  whole  Mediterranean.  But,  in  Carthage, 
Gaiseric  had  won  one  of  the  four  great  ports  of  the  ancient  world,  with  all 
its  ships,  docks,  galley  slaves  and  pilots3.  The  case  is  therefore  not 
parallel ;  for  the  men  who  conquered  England  had  to  rely  upon  their 
own  seamanship ;  and  they  needed  more  seamanship  than  was  required  to 
row  a  dug-out  down  the  Elbe,  before  they  could  conduct  a  campaign  across 
the  North  Sea 

Again,  the  character  of  the  Anglian  speech,  with  its  affinities  to  Frisian 
and  to  Scandinavian,  would  be  unintelligible  on  the  hypothesis  of  Zeuss. 
(Cf.  Jordan,  Eigentumlichkeiten  des  anglischen  Wortschatzes,  1906,  114; 
Jordan  in  Verhandlungen,  139-140  ;  Mb'ller  in  A.f.d.A.  xxn,  147,  etc.} 

Yet  the  evidence  for  placing  the  original  home  of  the  Angles  on  the 
Saale,  near  Merseburg,  so  far  from  being  of  the  overwhelming  kind  necessary 
to  overcome  difficulties  like  these,  is  of  the  very  slenderest.  It  rests  solely 
upon  the  words  of  Ptolemy  : 

"  The  greatest  of  the  tribes  dwelling  in  the  interior  are  the  tribe  of 
the  Sueboi  Aggeiloi,  who  lie  east  of  the  Laggobardoi,  stretching  towards 
the  north  as  far  as  the  middle  of  the  river  Elbe  ;  and  the  tribe  of  the 
Sueboi  Semnones,  who  extend  from  that  portion  of  the  river  Elbe 
eastwards4." 

By  the  Suevi  Angili  Ptolemy  pretty  clearly  means  the  Angles  (for  the 
Angles,  according  to  Tacitus,  formed  with  the  Langobardi  and  the  Semuones 
part  of  the  great  Suevic  confederation).  The  Suevi  Langobardi  have  already 
been  located  by  Ptolemy  below  the  Sygambri  on  the  Rhine :  whilst  the  seats 
of  the  Semnones  we  know  from  abundant  evidence.  Ptolemy's  Sueboi 
Aggeiloi,  between  these  two,  would  still  be  fifty  miles  distant  from  the 

1  p.  32. 

2  Dani  Herulos  propriis  sedibus  expulerunt,  Jordanes  in.     See  note  to  Eolum 
(1.  87). 

3  See  Gibbon,  ed.  Bury,  in,  410. 

4  TWV  5£  frrbs  Kal  /j.effayeluv   tQv&v  niyiara  i^v  t<m.  T(>  re  ruv  "Zirtifiwv  r&v 
A.yyei\wv,  01  dffiv  dvaroXiKurepoi  r&v  Aayyofidpduv  dvarelvovres  Trpos  ray  Apitrovs 
fJ^XP1   r<*>v  tdffuv  TOV  "AX/3ios  irorafj-ov,   Kal  ri>  TLOV  Suij/Saw  rCiv  2e/JU'6t>i*v,   oirices 

fifTa  rbv  "AXfiiv  dwo  TOV  elp-q/dvov  ^pous  ir/ods  dvaToXdj  ^XP1  T°*> 
....     Geographia  n,  11,  8. 

16—2 


244  Widsith 

district  of  Merseburg  and  Leipzig.  This  essential  point  is  overlooked  by 
Erdmann,  who  speaks  as  if  the  account  of  Ptolemy  (and,  indeed,  of  Tacitus) 
placed  the  Angles  on  the  Elbe  and  Saale  (p.  24).  Yet  nearer  than  fifty  miles 
no  amount  of  stretching  of  Ptolemy's  words  will  bring  them  ;  for  the 
Merseburg  district  is  south,  not  west,  of  the  ancient  home  of  the  Semnones. 

But,  further,  Ptolemy  is  here  so  confused  and  uncertain  that  he  has 
puzzled  generations  of  scholars.  The  explanation  given  by  a  recent  editor, 
Muller,  seems  convincing1.  Ptolemy,  it  must  be  remembered,  accurate  and 
well  informed  on  the  whole  as  he  was,  wrote  in  Egypt,  compiling  his  notes 
of  German  geography  from  various  more  or  less  imperfect  statements.  He 
knew,  and  reported  quite  correctly,  that  the  Angles  dwelt  N.E.  of  the 
Lombards  :  but  as  to  the  Lombards  he  failed  to  reconcile  his  authorities. 
Under  the  name  of  the  Aa/t»co£ap8oi  he  placed  them  quite  rightly  "next  to 
the  Angrivarii,"  i.e.  on  the  left  bank  of  the  lower  Elbe.  But  meeting  them, 
in  some  other  record,  described  as  the  Suevi  Langobardi — he  did  not 
recognize  them  as  the  same  people.  He  could  not  put  these  Suevi  Lango 
bardi  in  their  right  place,  which  he  was  reserving  for  their  shadows,  the 
Laccobardi.  Consequently  they  are  misplaced,  on  the  right  bank  of  the 
Rhine ;  and  this,  in  turn,  leads  inevitably  to  a  dislocation  of  the  Suevi 
Angili,  whose  position  is  denned  with  reference  to  the  Suevi  Langobardi. 

Yet  just  because  in  the  second  century  a  puzzled  Egyptian  geographer 
failed  to  unravel  the  truth  from  conflicting  accounts,  we  must  not  give  the 
lie  to  Bede  and  Alfred.  When  we  adopt  Miiller's  explanation,  and  perceive 
that  the  Laccobardi  and  the  Suevi  Langobardi  are  one  and  the  same, 
the  Angles  drop  at  once  into  the  right  place,  N.E.  of  the  Lombards,  and 
consequently  on  the  sea  coast,  in  conformity  with  the  evidence  of  Tacitus, 
Bede,  Alfred,  Beowulf,  and  the  Historia  Brittonum. 

But  though  Ptolemy's  evidence  for  an  original  Anglian  home  in  central 
Germany  falls,  on  examination,  to  the  ground,  the  linguistic  evidence,  as  we 
have  seen,  and  the  evidence  of  place  names  proves  that  there  was  some  kind 
of  a  settlement  of  Anglian  and  kindred  tribes  on  the  banks  of  the  Saale, 
on  the  northern  borders  of  the  ancient  Thuringia.  How  this  settlement 
came  about  we  do  not  know2,  but  we  seem  to  catch  a  glimpse  of  these 

1  See  Claudii  Ptolemaei   Geographia,  ed.  C.  Miillerus  i,   1,  258.      Paris, 
Didot,  1883.     "  E  boreali  ilia  regione  Anglos  in  mediam  Germaniam  penetrasse, 
aut  priscas  eorum  sedes  ibi  ad  mediam  Albim  fuisse,  e  Ptolemaeo  multi  colle- 
gerunt,    quern    ego    hoc   quoque  loco   falsa   exhibere  censeo.      Becte  quidem 
Ptolemseus  Angilos  a  Langobardis  ortum  et  boream  versus  collocaverit,   sed 
quemadmodum  Langobardi  isti  ponendi  erant   eo  in   loco   ubi   Laccobardos 
posuit,  sic  etiam  Angli  a  Laccobardis  s.  Langobardis  ortum  boreamque  versus 
inter  hos  et  Saxones,  collocandi  fuerint. "     Cf.  also  Mullenhoff  on  Ptolemy  in 
Nordalb.  Stud,  i,  112  ;  and  Z.f.d.A.  ix,  233. 

2  The  obvious  conjecture  is  that  of  an  immigration  of  Engle  and  Wsernas 
from  the  districts  nearer  tbe  mouth  of  the  Elbe,  in  perhaps  the  fifth  century — 
hardly  earlier,  as  the  immigration  must  have  taken  place  after  the  Anglo- 
Frisian  idiosyncracies  had  become  marked.      See  Bremer  in  P.B.B.  ix,  579. 
Seelmann  (p.  90)  denies  the  immigration  so  far  as  the  Angles  are  concerned, 


Appendix  245 

"Thuringian"  Angles  and  Varini  once  about  the  year  500,  and  again 
about  the  year  800. 

(1)  Amongst  Cassiodorus'  Varice1  there  is  extant  a  letter  from  Theodo- 
ric,  the  Ostrogoth,  to  the  kings  of  the  Heruli,  Warni,  and   Thuringi, 
suggesting  an  alliance.     Clovis,  king  of  the   Franks,   was  at  this  time 
pressing  hard  upon  Theodoric's  friends  and  allies,  the  Visigoths,  and  it  was 
Theodoric's  aim  to  bring  about  a  coalition  which  should  prevent  him 
pursuing  his  aggressive  schemes. 

(2)  There  is  also  a  code  of  laws,  dating  probably  from  the  time  of 
Charles  the  Great,  three  centuries  after  Theodoric's  letter,  which  bears  the 
superscription  Lex  Angliorum  et  Werinorum  hoc  est  Thuringorum.    This 
"  Law  of  the  Thuringian  Angles  and  Varini  "  is  said  by  students  of  com 
parative  Germanic  law  to  show  traces  of   kinship  with   English,   and 
particularly  with  Kentish  law ;  but  in  the  main  it  has  taken  the  form 
impressed  upon  it  by  the  Frankish  influence  under  which  it  has  passed2. 

(3)  Further  confirmation  of  the  settlement  of  the  Varini  (Waernas)  in 
ancient  North  Thuringia  has  been  found  in  the  frequent  occurrence  of 
place  names  ending  in  leben  within  that  district.     This  form  is  not  found 
elsewhere  in  Germany  till  we  come  to  Schleswig,  where  it  occurs  in  the  form 
lev.     This  fact,  when  first  pointed  out3,  was  taken  to  support  the  theory  of 
an  Anglian  settlement  in  Thuringia.    But  it  has  been  shown  more  recently 
that  it  is  only  in  Northern  Schleswig  that  the  names  in  lev  are  found,  and 
that  they  extend  over  all  modern  Denmark,  and,  in  the  form  lof,  over  parts 
of  the  southern  coast  of  Sweden4.    In  Angeln  and  the  islands  immediately 
adjoining  these  names  are  not  found  :   and  they  are  found  only  rarely 
in  England.     These  place  names  then  point,  in  all  probability,  to  settle 
ments,  not  of  the  Angles  proper  but  of  their  northern  neighbours,  Varini 
and  Jutes.     The  occasional  occurrence  of  English  place  names  in  lew,  ICKW 
is  to  be  attributed  to  settlements  of  Jutes  and  Wsernas  in  England. 

We,  may,  then,  take  it  as  certain  that  there  was,  from  at  least  the  early 
sixth  to  the  early  ninth  century,  upon  the  northern  borders  of  Thuringia, 
a  semi-independent  kingdom  of  the  Wsernas,  and,  adjoining  it,  settlements 
of  the  Engle  and  Heruli. 

Unfortunately,  the  question  of  the  home  of  these  "  Thuringian  "  Angli 
and  Varini  has  been  complicated  by  the  fact  that  there  were  two  Thuringias  : 
the  great  kingdom  in  central  Germany,  and  a  smaller  Thoringia  near  the 

and  regards  the  Saale- Angles  as  ancient  inhabitants  of  the  country,  not  immi 
grants  from  Schleswig.     But  this  is  contrary  to  probability,  and  rests  merely 
upon  Ptolemy's  statement  as  to  Angles  in  the  neighbourhood  (and  certainly  not 
the  immediate  neighbourhood)  in  the  second  century. 
i  m,  3.  2  Chadwick,  81,  108. 

3  By  P.  Cassel,  Ueber  Thiiringische  Ortsnamen,  Erfurt,  1856  (Berichte  der 
Erfurter  Akademie). 

4  See  Seelmann,  Die  Ortsnamenendung  "leben,"  J.d. V.f.n.S.  xii,  7-27.     It 
is  conceivable,  though  hardly  likely,  that  this  type  of  place  name  cropped  up 
independently  in  the  different  districts,  as  Erdmann  suggests  (p.  57). 


246  Widsith 

mouth  of  the  Rhine,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  modern  Dordrecht 1.  Hence 
arose  the  theory  that  the  Anglii  and  Werini  referred  to  in  the  Lex,  and 
the  Guarni  and  Thoringi  addressed  by  Theodoric,  dwelt  in  the  Netherlands2. 
A  further  development  of  this  theory  would  make  these  Netherland  Angles 
the  source  of  the  English  name.  According  to  this  view,  settlers  from  the 
Anglian  nation  at  the  mouth  of  the  Rhine  may  have  taken  part  in  the 
invasion  of  England  in  sufficient  quantities  to  have  given  their  name  to 
parts  of  the  conquered  country,  and  it  may  be  to  them  rather  than  to 
any  connection  with  the  Angel  in  Schleswig  that  the  name  of  England 
is  due3. 

Now  here  we  must  discriminate  carefully.  That  there  were  in  the 
Netherlands  settlements,  small  or  great,  of  Engle  and  Wsernas,  of  Saxons 
and  Jutes,  is  possible  enough  ;  and  from  the  shores  of  the  Low  Country 
many  of  the  attacking  fleets  may  have  set  out.  But  this  does  not  help  us 
with  regard  to  the  original  home  of  the  Engle  and  Waernas,  for  the  state 
ments  of  Ptolemy  and  Tacitus  make  it  quite  clear  that  Angli  and  Varini 
were  not  settled  in  the  Netherlands  in  the  first  and  second  centuries.  These 
Angles  of  the  Low  Countries  must  then  have  been  immigrants  from  an 
older  home,  wherever  that  home  may  have  been.  But  that  the  Warni 
to  whom  Theodoric  wrote,  and  the  Anglii  and  Werini  of  the  Lex, 
may  have  dwelt  in  the  Netherlands,  and  that  these  may  have  been 
intimately  connected  with  the  settlers  in  England,  is  possible  enough. 
Direct  evidence,  it  is  true,  is  wanting.  For  the  Angles  there  is  none, 
beyond  a  corrupt  passage  in  Adam  of  Bremen4,  who  in  any  case  is  an 
authority  too  late  to  count  for  much  in  the  period  we  are  considering. 

1  See  note  to  pyringum  (11.  30,  86). 

2  This  theory  was  first  advanced  by  H.  Miiller  (Der  Lex  Salica  und  der  Lex 
Angliorum  et  Werinorum  Alter  und  Heimat,  1840,  pp.  120  and  121).     Miiller 
was  followed  by  P.  C.  Molhuysen,  De  Anglen  in  Nederland,  in  the  Bijdragen 
voor  Vaderlandsche  Geschiedenis  en  Oudheidkunde,  in,  pp.  50-72  (1842).     Waitz 
tentatively  approved  this  conjecture  (Das  alte  Recht  der  Salischen  Franken, 
1846,  p.  50). 

Arguments  against  the  theory  of  an  Anglian  settlement  in  the  Netherlands 
will  be  found  in  a  review  of  Muller's  work  by  the  Freiherr  v.  Eichthofen  in  the 
Kritische  Jahrbiicher  filr  deutsche  Bechtswissenschaft,  1841,  pp.  996-1018.  See 
especially  p.  1015,  with  its  very  reasonable  warning  against  drawing  any  con 
clusion  from  the  occurrence  of  small  isolated  places  compounded  with  the  name 
Engel.  "  In  a  district  where  the  bulk  of  the  population  were  Angles,  a  single 
spot  would  hardly  be  called  by  their  name."  Mr  Inman  has  plausibly  sug 
gested  that  "the  occurrence  of  Aengil — Engel — in  relation  to  places  in  Belgium 
and  Holland  (Felwe,  Ghent,  Texandria,  Texel,  Tournay,  Utrecht)  is  possibly  in 
connection  with  Anglian  missions  of  the  7th  or  8th  century." 

3  "Ved  Binmundingerne  bode  Angler  med  Varner,  altsa  hasrMger  udgaede 
fra  Anglerne  og  Varnerne  inde  i  Tyskland.     Hovdinger  herfra  i  ledtog  med  de 
egenlige  Sakser  (Friser)  kunde  flytte  Angle-navnet  til  England."     Undersflgelser 
til  Nordisk  Oldhistorie  af  C.  A.  E.  Jessen,  Ktfbenhavn,  1862,  p.  51.     But  Jessen 
thinks  it  more  likely  that  the  name  sprang  up  independently  in  England. 

4  Igitur  Saxones  primo  circa  Eenum  sedes  habebant  [et  vocati  sunt  Angli], 
Adam  of  Bremen,,  i,  3,  ed.  Lappenberg  in  Pertz  (fol.),  SS.  vn,  p.  285.     The 
words  are  wanting  in  the  best  MS.  and  were  accordingly  bracketed  by  the  editor. 
Indeed  "they  can  hardly  be  taken  seriously"  (Chadwick,  p.  111). 


Appendix  247 

For  the  Wsernas  we  have  the  statement  of  Procopius  that  the  Rhine 
divides  the  Varini  from  the  Franks1;  but  Procopius'  ideas  as  to  the 
geography  of  these  regions  are  confused  in  the  extreme.  The  strongest 
evidence  is  of  an  indirect  nature.  Thus,  it  has  been  urged2  that  the  Old 
English  loan  words  from  the  Latin  are,  on  the  one  hand,  of  a  kind  which 
could  not  have  been  borrowed  in  the  remote  continental  home  in  Schleswig, 
but  that,  on  the  other  hand,  they  show  such  close  relationship  to  con 
tinental  loan  words  as  to  preclude  the  possibility  of  their  having  been 
borrowed  subsequent  to  the  settlement  in  Britain,  and  that  consequently 
the  Angles  must  have  been  settled  for  some  time  in  a  continental  home 
subject  to  Latin  influence.  So  that  it  is  quite  possible  that  those  scholars 
are  right  who  believe  that  there  were  large  settlements  of  Engle  and 
Waernas  in  the  Netherlands3:  it  is  certain  that  there  were  also  such 
settlements  far  inland,  on  the  upper  Elbe  and  Saale.  But  that  neither  of 
these  could  have  been  the  original  home  of  the  Angles  is  clear  from  the 
evidence  of  Tacitus  alone,  had  we  nothing  more.  "  We  may  boldly  main 
tain  that  in  these  dark  ages  no  similar  fact  is  better  attested  than  the  origin 
of  the  English  Angles  from  Angel  in  Schleswig4."  In  these  words  the 
controversy  was  summed  up  some  twenty  years  ago  ;  and  though  in  every 
generation  some  good  scholar  revives  the  heresy  of  Zeuss,  and  brings  his 
Angles  from  the  inland,  none  have  yet  succeeded  in  finding  any  satisfactory 
justification  for  this  eccentric  view. 

Here  then,  as  in  every  other  point  of  old  Germanic  tradition  where  we 
are  able  to  control  him,  we  find  the  poet  of  Widsith  to  be  well  informed. 

1  E.G.  iv,  20.     See  note  to  Wernum  (I.  25). 

2  Hoops'  Waldbaume  u.  Kulturpflanzen   (esp.    Kap.   xiv,   Die   kontincntale 
Heimat  der  Angelsachsen  und  die  romische  Kultur,  566-589). 

3  Mullenhoff  in  Nordalb.  Stud,  i,  130-133,  1844,  accepted  Miiller's  view 
of  Anglian  settlements  in  the  Netherlands  :  so  did  Moller  (V.E.  18).     Holler's 
arguments  in  favour  of  England  having  been  invaded  from  the  Netherlands  will 
be  found  in  A.f.d.A.  xxn,  152.     Bremer,  in  Pauls  Grdr.  (3)  n,  854,  also  places 
the  Lex  Angliorum  in  the  Netherlands,  and  supposes  the  advance  guard  of  the 
Angles  to  have  had  their  base  there,  though  the  bulk  of  their  later  followers 
were  drawn  from  Schleswig.     On  the  other  hand,  that  the  Lex  belongs  to  the 
Angles  of  the  Elbe  and  Saale  is  urged  by  many  scholars.     Schroeder  (Lehrbuch 
der  deutschen  Rechtsgeschichte,  1902,  p.  248)  regards  this  as  the  only  tenable 
view.    Though  the  Lex  must  belong  to  one  or  the  other  locality,  there  is  nothing 
inconsistent  in  supposing  that  there  were  settlements  of  Engle  and  Wsernas  both 
in  the  Thoringia  of  the  Netherlands  and  in  the  main  Thuringia  (so  Erdmann, 
Heimat  der  Angeln,  p.  28).     That  the  evidence  of  loan  words  points  to  Saxons 
and  Jutes  having  invaded  England  from  the  lower  Rhine  has  also  been  argued 
by  Heuser,  I.F.  xiv,  Anzeiger,  p.  30  (1903). 

4  Weiland,  Die  Angeln,  1889,  p.  18. 


248 

(F)    ISTE. 

The  Iste  are  apparently  identical  with  the  Aestii  of  Tacitus.  What 
were  the  linguistic  and  racial  affinities  of  these  Aestii  is  not  certain,  but 
their  situation  is  fixed.  They  dwelt  on  the  "Amber  Coast"  of  the  Baltic, 
which  extends  from  the  Frische  Haff  in  East  Prussia  in  a  north-easterly 
direction  over  the  frontier  into  the  "Baltic  Provinces"  of  Russia.  Tacitus 
describes  the  Aestii  as  being,  in  their  religious  rites  and  dress,  like  the 
Suevi,  and  though  he  notes  that  their  tongue  resembles  the  British,  he 
classes  them  among  the  Germans.  They  gather  amber  on  the  coast 
sed  et  mare  scrutantur,  ac  soli  omnium  sudnum  quod  ipsi  glesum  vacant 
inter  vada  atque  in  ipso  littore  legunt....Ipsis  in  nullo  usu,  rude  legitur, 
informe  perfertur,  pretiumque  mir -antes  accipiunt1. 

In  a  letter  of  Cassiodorus  (Hestis  Theodericus  rex2)  the  Hesti  are 
thanked  by  the  Gothic  king  for  a  gift  of  amber,  and  edified  by  his  minister 
with  much  information  as  to  its  nature,  which  Cassiodorus  has  taken  out 
of  the  Germania.  The  Aesti  are  also  mentioned  by  Jordanes  as  occupying 
the  sea  coast  a  little  to  the  east  of  the  Vistula  :  he  characterizes  them  as 
pacatum  hominum  genus,  and  mentions  them  as  having  formed  part  of 
Ermanaric's  empire3. 

The  correct  form  of  the  word  in  Latin  writers  is  uncertain  :  the  MSS. 
of  Tacitus  fluctuate :  apparently  we  should  read  Aestii,  the  Ae  representing, 
as  often,  a  Germanic  Ai  (Kluge  in  Pauls  Ordr.  (2)  I,  357).  Einhard  calls 
them  AM,  Haisti  ( Vita  Caroli  in  Pertz  (fol.),  SS.  n,  449).  The  Gothic 
form  of  the  name  would  be  probably  *Aistjus,  pointing  to  a  Prim.  Germ. 
Aisteues* ;  or  perhaps  Gothic  *Aisteis6.  With  these  Gothic  forms  the  Icel. 
Eistir6  would  agree  :  the  corresponding  English  form  would  be  *^Este, 
which  however  is  nowhere  found. 

Two  forms  of  the  word  are  found  in  the  O.E.  Orosius.  (1)  Osti,  a  form 
no  doubt  borrowed  from  the  Germans  of  the  Continent  and  due  to  false 
analogy  with  dst,  "east"7.  (2)  Este,  the  form  used  in  the  account  of 
Wulf stan's  voyage.  It  has  even  been  supposed  by  some  scholars8  that 

1  Germania,  XLV.  2  Variae,  v,  2. 

3  Aestorum  quoque  similiter  nationem,  qui  longissimam  ripam  Oceani  Ger- 
manici  insident,  idem  ipse  prudentia  et  uirtute  subegit  (ed.  Mommsen,  xxm). 

4  Cf.  Erdmann,  p.  90  ;  Miillenhoff,  D.A.  n,  13. 
B  Grimm,  G.D.S.  719  (fourth  ed.  500). 

8  But  note  that  the  Eistir  of  the  sagas  do  not  occupy  the  same  country  as 
the  Aestii  of  Tacitus.  These  Eistir  live  far  to  the  north  of  the  "Amber Coast," 
in  the  modern  province  of  Esthonia.  That  the  O.N.  Eistland  is  limited  to 
Esthonia  and  did  not  include  the  neighbouring  Courland  or  Livonia  is  clear. 
Cf.  Hjd  Garftariki  liggja  lond  }>essi.... Eistland,  Lifland,  K&rland.  (Annota 
tions  geographiques  tiroes  du  livre  de  Hauk  Erlendsen  in  Antiquites  russes,  n, 
438.) 

7  Cf.  Miillenhoff,   D.A.  u,   13.     The  Baltic   is  called  in   the  Orosius  the 
Ost-Sce. 

8  e.g.  Latham  in  his  edition  of  the  Germania.  1851,  166,  etc. ;  Bielenstein, 
300,  373. 


Appendix  243 

the  word  means  "  Easterlings,"  the  Eastern  folk  ;  but  that  there  is  any 
original  etymological  connection  with  "  east "  is  impossible,  in  view  of  the 
Latin  forms  (Aist-  never  Aust-),  and  of  the  fact  that  the  Icelandic  sagas 
generally  give  the  form  Eistland,  only  exceptionally  Eystland  (see  Fornaldar 
Sogur,  1829,  i,  509).  But  that  a  popular  etymology  sprang  up,  connecting 
Esth  and  East,  is  clear  ;  such  an  etymology  would  be  almost  inevitable  in 
view  of  such  constantly  recurring  phrases  as  "  Esthland  in  the  East." 
(Cf.  Fornm.  S.  iv,  162  j  vm,  272.) 

The  same  false  etymology  accounts,  as  has  been  stated,  for  the  O.E. 
form  Osti,  and  apparently  for  Este  as  well.  It  also  accounts  for  our  not 
finding  the  phonetically  correct  form  jEste  (<Astiz),  but  instead  the 
form  in  our  text,  Iste  (< leste  <  Eastiz). 

With  regard  to  the  racial  affinities  of  the  Aestii  :  Grimm,  following 
Tacitus,  supposed  them  to  have  been  Germans,  and  claimed  in  support  of 
his  theory  that  in  Widsith  the  Iste  are  mentioned  together  with  German 
tribes.  This  argument,  however,  is  based  upon  an  interpretation  of  Eolas 
and  Idumingas  which  is  doubtful  in  the  first  case,  and  almost  certainly 
wrong  in  the  second.  Erdmann  also  (p.  93)  supposes  the  Aestii  to  have 
been  originally  a  Gothic  stock,  whence  the  embassy  to  Theodoric  the 
Goth1.  Both  Grimm  and  Erdmann  admit  that  this  German  stock  was 
later  swamped  by  Finnish  and  Lithuanian  elements,  which  appropriated 
to  themselves  the  name  of  the  original  German  tribe2.  More  generally, 
however,  it  has  been  supposed  that  the  Aestii  were  from  the  beginning 
either  Finnish  or  Lithuanian3.  According  to  Bremer  they  were  Finnish4, 
but  the  greater  number  of  scholars  have  agreed  in  regarding  them  as 
members  of  that  Lithuanian  family  which  to  this  day  occupies  the 
country  where  we  first  meet  with  the  Aestii  of  Tacitus  or  Cassiodorus. 
"On  this  Baltic  coast,"  says  Zeuss,  "has  dwelt  through  the  centuries  a 
race  which  must  be  distinguished  from  both  its  neighbours  (Germans  and 
Slavs)  and  which,  through  all  the  great  movements  which  have  taken 
place  around  it,  has  spread  but  a  little  over  its  original  borders.  This 
race  is  commonly  called,  from  one  of  its  branches,  the  Lithuanian.  Its 
true  collective  name  is  that  of  the  Aestii5."  Accordingly  a  certain  group 

1  But,  if  such  a  kinship  had  existed,  is  it  not  likely  that  some  reference 
would  have  been  made  to  it  in  Theodoric's  letter  of  thanks  ? 

2  It  is  clear  that  when  Wulfstan  visited  the  Este  their  language  and  customs 
were  not  German. 

3  As  Tacitus  can  only  have  known  the  Aestii  by  repute,  his  statement  that 
their  speech  was  British  is  of  little  positive  value  ;  yet  it  serves  to  show  that 
they  must  have  differed  in  speech  from  their  German  neighbours. 

4  Pauls  Grdr.(z)  in,  753;  cf.  also  Bremer's  review  of  Mullenhoff's  D.A.  in 
the  Litteraturblatt  f.  germ.  u.  rom.  Philol.,  1888,  436 ;  Kossinna,  Zeitschrift  fiir 
Ethnologic,  xxxiv,  214,  etc.     Much   (Hoops  Reallexikon,  54)  argues  from  the 
particulars  given  by  Tacitus  that  the  Aestii  must  have  been  Lithuanians,  not 
Finns. 

8  See  Zeuss,  268,  and  cf.  Mullenhoff,  D.A.  n,  11-34. 


250  Widsith 

of  writers  have  used  the  word  Aistisch  as  the  general  term  for  this 
Lithuanian  family.  Yet  it  is  not  certain  that  the  Aestii  were  not 
Finns :  and  it  is  certain  that  in  modern  times,  through  the  Norse 
Eistir,  the  word  Esth,  Esthonian,  has  come  to  signify  a  non-Lithuanian 
folk,  more  nearly  allied  to  the  Finns.  Probably  the  name  has  been 
transferred  from  the  Lithuanians  to  those  tribes  north  of  them  who  are 
now  called  Esths.  But  we  cannot  be  certain. 

If  the  word  was  at  one  time  supposed  by  the  Scandinavians  to  signify 
"  Eastern  men  "  we  can  the  more  easily  understand  how  it  lost  its  racial 
signification,  and  came  to  be  transferred  by  them  from  one  eastern  people 
to  another,  from  the  Lithuanians  of  the  Amber  Coast  to  the  Finnish 
tribes  of  Esthonia. 

The  problem  of  the  racial  affinities  of  the  Aestii  is  necessarily  bound 
up  with  the  larger  question  whether  the  present  Baltic  Provinces  of 
Russia  were,  in  the  early  centuries  of  our  era,  inhabited  by  a  Livonian 
(Finnish)  or  a  Lithuanian  or  Lettish  (Indo-Germanic)  people.  A  summary 
of  this  controversy,  with  full  references,  will  be  found  in  Bielenstein,  Die 
Orenzen  des  Lettischen  Volksstammes,  St  Petersburg,  1892,  348-378. 

The  probability  is,  then,  that  O.E.  form  Iste  is  due  to  false  analogy 
with  East ;  that  it  refers  to  the  Aestii,  and  that  the  Iste,  Aestii  were  a 
Lithuanian  people.  But  we  cannot  be  certain. 


(G)    IDUMINGAS. 

J.  Grimm  (G.D.S.,  500)  suggested  the  emendation  Eodingum,  which  he 
interpreted  as  the  luthungi,  recorded  by  Idatius  and  other  chroniclers. 
(See  Hydatii  Continuatio  in  Momm  sen's  Chronica  Minora  [A.D.  430], 
luthungi  per  eum  [Aetiurn]  debellantur ;  and  cf.  Zeuss,  312-314.) 
Grimm  would  further  identify  these  Eodingas  with  the  [NJuithones  of 
Tacitus.  He  abandoned  this  conjecture,  however,  preferring  to  identify 
the  Idumingas  with  the  Ydumaei  ("  Idumingum  rechtfertigt  sich  durch 
die  Ydumei  bei  Zeuss,  682,"  a  MS.  note  of  Grimm's,  incorporated  by 
Miillenhoff  in  the  posthumous  edition  of  the  G.D.S.,  1867). 

These  Ydumaei  are  mentioned  in  the  Chronicle  of  Henry  of  Ymera 
(cf.  Henrici  Chronicon  Lyvoniae  ex  rec.  W.  Arndt,  Hannoverae,  1874; 
Heinrich's  von  Lettland  Livlandische  Chronik,  iibersetzt  von  E.  Pabst, 
especially  the  footnote  to  p.  77).  The  identification  of  the  Idumingas 
with  the  Ydumaei  had  been  made  by  Ettmuller  in  1839  (see  pp.  24-5), 
and  later,  perhaps  independently,  by  F.  J.  Wiedemann  (see  his  Intro 
duction  to  J.  A.  Sj^gren's  Livische  Grammatik,  St  Petersburg,  1861, 
p.  xxix),  who  was  followed  by  Koskinnen  (Sur  I'antiquitd  des  Lives  en 
Livonie,  in  the  Acta  Societatis  Sdentiarum  Fennicce,  vin,  2,  395,  1866). 
But  Koskinnen  accepted  other  identifications  of  the  Ydumaei  incon- 


Appendix  251 

sistent  with  a  name  beginning  with  /.  Thus  he  supposed  Ydumaea 
the  same  as  Wulfstan's  Witland  (Alfred's  Orosius,  ed.  Sweet,  p.  20)  and 
as  the  modern  Lettish  and  Livonian  names  for  Livonia,  Widsemme  and 
Widumaa. 

Accepting  these  last  identifications  of  Ydumaea  with  Witland,  etc., 
Miillenhoff  pointed  out  that  Henry's  Ydumaea  could  in  that  case  be  only 
a  Latinized  corruption  :  that  the  name  must  have  begun  with  a  PP,  which 
Henry  had  dropped  in  order  to  bring  the  name  into  line  with  the 
Scriptural  Idumaea ;  and  that  these  [Wjidumaei  could  therefore  have 
nothing  to  do  with  the  Idumingas  of  Widsith  (Miillenhoff  D.A.  II,  347). 
The  O.E.  Idumingas  Miillenhoff  regarded  as  simply  the  biblical 
reminiscence  of  a  learned  interpolator  (Z.f.d.A.  xi,  291  ;  Grein-Wulcker, 
I,  401). 

MullenhofFs  argument  is  convincing,  but  the  premises  accepted  by 
him  and  by  Koskinnen  are  probably  incorrect. 

The  identification  of  Ydumaea  with  Wulfstan's  Witland  is  locally  and 
racially  more  than  doubtful,  and,  even  if  Ydumaea  is  identical  with  the 
modern  Widseme,  the  W  in  the  modern  word  is  apparently  not  original, 
and  due  either  to  corruption  or  false  analogy.  (See  A.  Bielenstein  Die 
Grenzen  des  Lettischen  Volksstammes,  St  Petersburg,  1892,  71-74,  and  a 
note  by  Prof.  Vilhelm  Thomson  in  the  Magazin  der  Lettisch.  Litterdrischen 
Oesellschaft,  xix,  3, 151  (1894) ;  but  compare  also  Bielenstein,  pp.  466-470, 
and  especially  the  arguments  of  E.  Kunik  in  favour  of  Miillenhoff's  theory 
and  the  originality  of  the  W.) 

Bielenstein  supposes  the  original  form  of  Henry's  Idumaea  to  have 
been  Yduma ;  and  in  adopting  this  form  he  is  not  led  by  any  desire  to 
bring  the  word  into  line  with  the  Old  English,  which  he  does  not  quote, 
but  only  by  the  etymology  of  the  word,  which  he  takes  to  be  of  Livonian 
origin  signifying  the  north-east-land.  Henry's  corruption  is  therefore 
confined  to  the  second  half  of  the  word,  which  is  obviously  corrupt  also  in 
the  O.E.  Iduming  (cf.  Lidwicing],  whilst  the  first  syllable  of  the  word  is 
identical  in  each  case.  Phonetically  then  the  identification  of  Idumingas 
with  Ydumaei  is  possible  enough.  But  it  cannot  be  accepted  as  certain,  in 
view  of  the  great  lapse  of  time  between  Widsith  and  Henry's  Chronicle. 
This  difficulty  is  somewhat  increased  by  the  fact  that  the  Ydumaei  are  a 
tiny  tribe  occupying  a  territory  about  the  size  of  one  of  the  smaller 
English  counties.  We  should  hardly  expect  so  small  a  people  to 
maintain  itself  throughout  seven  centuries  in  such  vast  regions.  The 
identification  of  Henry's  Ydumaei  with  the  Idumingas  of  our  text  can, 
then,  be  accepted  only  with  considerable  reservation. 

Ydumaea  is  mentioned  in  sufficient  detail  by  Henry  to  enable  us  to 
locate  it  accurately  (see  Wiedemann,  p.  xxiv  :  A.  Bielenstein's  Atlas  der 
ethnologischen  Geographie  des  Lettenlandes,  St  Petersburg,  1892).  It  was 


Widsith 

the  smallest  of  the  districts  into  which  Livonia  was  divided,  lying  between 
the  Raupa  (modern  Brasle)  and  the  Aa.  The  Fdumaei  were  in  Henry's 
day  Livonians,  with  a  sprinkling  of  Letts.  The  collocation  of  Idumingas 
with  the  Iste  (who  are  most  probably  Letts  and  Lithuanians)  and  of 
both  with  the  most  eastern  German  tribes  of  the  border,  the  Heruli  and 
Thuringians,  certainly  looks  like  a  piece  of  genuine  tradition  accurately 
preserved. 


(H)    THE  TEEM  HR^DAS  APPLIED  TO  THE  GOTHS. 

This  term  is  found  in  O.E.  and  in  Scandinavian  sources,  but  not  else 
where.  The  Scandinavian  documents  are  confused.  The  Icelandic 
geographers  of  the  14th  century  explain  Reiftgotaland  as  a  district 
bordering  upon  Poland  (Antiq.  russes,  n,  438,  447).  Snorri  equates  it 
with  Jutland.  He  evidently  had  a  false  etymology  in  mind,  connecting 
the  name  with  reift,  "  carriage,"  for  he  makes  it  apply  to  the  mainland,  as 
opposed  to  Eygotaland,  the  islands  (see  Sn.  Edda,  udg.  J6nsson,  pp.  7, 
143)  :  Reffigotaland  is  referred  to  also  in  the  Heimskringla  (udg.  J6nsson, 
1893,  i,  18).  Again,  in  one  of  the  redactions  of  the  Hervarar  Saga,  Re&$- 
gotaland  is  explained  as  Jutland  (Fornaldar  Sogur,  ed.  Rafn,  I,  526). 
Other  Icelandic  interpretations  will  be  found  in  Heinzel  (H&rvararsaga 
in  W.S.B.  cxiv,  56).  It  is  to  be  noted  that  in  the  fragmentary  lay  upon 
which  this  portion  of  the  Hervarar  Saga  is  founded,  the  land  of  the  Goths 
lies  north  and  west  of  the  land  of  the  Huns,  with  Mirkwood  between. 
This  is  the  geography  of  Widsith :  Goths  and  Huns  facing,  with  the 
Vistula  wood  between. 

The  origin  of  the  name  is  equally  uncertain :  the  Old  English  poets 
certainly  understood  it  to  mean  "  the  glorious  Goths "  (hreft,  glory)  and 
this  etymology  has  been  supported  with  more  or  less  hesitation  by  Rieger 
(Lesebuch,  286) ;  Vigfusson  in  Cleasby's  Icelandic  Dictionary,  sub  voce 
hrbftr;  Kunik  in  the  Memoires  de  I'Acade'mie  des  Sciences  de  St  Petersbourg 
vil,  xxiii,  1,  pp.  381-4  ;  Kern  in  Cosijn's  Taalkundige  Bijdragen,  Haarlem, 
1877,  p.  29 ;  Bugge  (contrary  to  his  earlier  view)  in  P.B.JB.  xxiv,  445-6. 
Kunik,  Kern,  and  Bugge  devise  different  methods  of  bringing  O.E. 
hreft  (from  *hrdfyi)  and  Icel.  hrety  (from  *hratyi)  from  one  and  the 
same  root. 

The  exact  forms  preserved  are  Reiftgotaland  in  Icelandic,  both  prose 
and  verse  ;  Hratymarar  in  the  10th  century  Swedish  Runic  inscription  at 
Rok,  referring  to  Theodoric's  realm ;  Hreftcyninges,  Hreftgotum,  Hrceda 
(gen.  from  a  nom.  Hrcedas  or  Hrcede)  in  Widsith  ;  Hreftgotan,  HreSa, 
in  the  Elene.  (For  the  shortened  forms  cf.  Wederas  for  Wedergeatas  in 
Beowulf.}  Ettmiiller  (T)  was  the  first  to  point  out  that  the  metre  demands 
an  h  in  the  one  passage  where  the  word  occurs  in  Icelandic  verse,  and  that 


Appendix  253 


RetiS  is  therefore  a  corruption  of  #m'$  ;  and  this  is  confirmed  by  the  h  in 
Swedish  and  O.E.  Ettmuller  also  pointed  out  that  the  Icelandic  ei  does 
not  correspond  to  the  O.E.  e  (Hre%-\  but  to  ce  (Hrceda).  This  was  further 
emphasized  by  Miillenhoff  (Z.f.d.A.  xn,  260).  The  fact  that  one  of  the 
forms  in  Widsith,  Hrceda,  supports  the  Scandinavian  form  (H)rei'S  leads 
us  to  regard  this  as  original,  and  the  O.E.  Hrefi  as  due  to  false  analogy. 
The  true  derivation  of  ffrced  (from  ffrai]n)  remains  still  to  seek.  Heinzel 
(Ostgotische  Heldensage  in  W.S.B.  cxix,  pp.  26-8)  derives  from  Radagais 
(O.E.  Rcedgota}  who  was  cut  to  pieces,  with  his  Goths,  in  Italy  in  405. 
The  name  would  then  mean  "the  Goths  of  Radagais."  Gering  (Z.f.d.Ph. 
xxvi,  26)  suggests  a  connection  with  hrty,  "tempest,"  "The  storm-  or 
battle-Goths."  Much  (Z.f.d.A.  xxxix,  52)  would  connect  with  hrains 
pure,  comparing  Beorhtdene  in  Beowulf.  None  of  these  suggestions,  nor 
others  hazarded  by  Fbrstemann  in  Kuhn's  Zeitschrift  fur  vergleich.  Sprach- 
forschung,  xix,  367,  are  probable. 

See  also  Grimm,  G.D.S.,  446,  740-1  ;  Jessen  in  Z.f.d.Ph.  in,  72  ; 
Munch,  Saml.  Afhandl.  I,  439,  n,  105-10  ;  Bugge,  Ueber  die  Insch.  des 
Roksteins  ;  Bugge  in  P.B.B.  xn,  6,  7  ;  Jiriczek  (2)  127  ;  Schiitte  in  A.f.n.F. 
xxi,  37. 


(I)    ERMANARIC  AS  THE  FOE  OF  THE  HUNS. 

It  has  recently  been  argued  by  Heusler  (Berl.  Sitzungsberichte, 
xxxvn,  925,  1909  ;  Hoops  Reallexikon,  Attila,  p.  138)  that  the  story  of 
Ermanaric  as  the  typical  foe  of  the  Huns  had  no  continued  existence,  but 
was  first  forgotten,  and  then  invented  again  about  the  ninth  century 
when,  since  Theodoric  was  represented  as  taking  refuge  with  Attila, 
hostile  relations  between  Ermanaric  and  Attila  were  imagined. 

The  historic  fact  of  antagonism  between  the  Huns  and  Ermanaric  is 
recorded  in  the  fourth  century  by  Ammianus.  It  would  be  a  strange 
coincidence  had  the  poets  in  the  ninth  century  reproduced  this 
situation  accidentally,  and  such  coincidence  can  hardly  be  assumed  with 
out  evidence. 

But  the  evidence  is  all  to  the  contrary.  Jordanes  in  the  sixth  century 
represents  Ermanaric  as  the  foe  of  the  Huns.  In  Widsith  the  grouping  of 
Attila  and  Ermanaric 


weold  Hunum,  Eormanric  Gotum  (1.  18) 

might  reasonably  be  supposed  to  be  due  to  a  reminiscence  of  their 
connection  in  story,  precisely  as  in  the  exactly  parallel  Icelandic  lines 
the  contending  parties  are  grouped  together  : 

Ar  kv6fto  Humla  Hiinom  raSa, 
Gitzor  Gautom,  Gotom  Anganty.... 


Widsith 

This  of  course  is  only  an  inference,  but  on  the  other  hand  it  hardly 
admits  of  dispute  that  in  Widsith  (11.  109-122)  the  innweorud  Earmanrices 
is  represented  as  combating  the  people  of  Attila.  This  is  certainly  earlier 
than  the  tradition  which  makes  Attila  the  refuge  of  Theodoric;  yet 
Widsith  was  popular  enough  to  be  still  transcribed  c.  1000,  by  which 
time  Attila  was  widely  known  as  Theodoric's  protector.  So  that  we 
have  an  exceptionally  good  chain  of  evidence  for  the  continuity  of  the 
tradition  of  hostility  between  Ermanaric  and  Attila.  I  have  accordingly 
assumed  this  continuity  as  proved  (pp.  45,  etc.). 


(K)    THE  LAST  ENGLISH  ALLUSION  TO  WUDGA 
AND  KAMA. 

The  following  passage,  discovered  by  Dr  Imelmann  in  MS.  Cotton 
Vesp.  D.  iv  (fol.  139  b),  is  of  the  utmost  importance  for  the  history  of 
heroic  tradition  in  England  : 

In  diebws  illis  imperante  Valentiniano  imperatore  uel  pn'ncipe, 
regnum  barbaroram  et  germ&norum  exortum  est.  Surgentesqwe 
popwli  et  naciones  per  totam  europam  cowsederuwt.  Hoc  testantw 
gesta  rudolphi  et  hunlapi,  Unwini  et  Widie,  horsi  et  hengisti,  Waltef 
et  hame  quorwm  quidam  in  Italia,  quidam  in  Gallia,  alii  in  bn'tanwia 
ceteri  uero  in  Germania  armis  et  rebus  bellicis  claruerwit. 

The  MS.  is  late  :  but  whatever  be  the  source  of  the  information,  it 
seems  clear  that  the  stories  of  Wudga,  Hama,  Hrothwulf,  Unwen, 
Hunlaf(ing),  Hengest  and  Hors(a)  were  current  till  so  long  after  the 
Norman  conquest  that  it  was  possible  for  these  heroes  to  be  classed  with 
Waltef.  Dr  Imelmann  is  to  be  congratulated  on  an  important  discovery, 
which  compels  us  to  alter  our  ideas  as  to  the  date  when  these  stories  may 
have  become  extinct.  See  D.L.Z.  xxx,  p.  999  (April  1909). 


(L)    THE  GEOGRAPHY  OF  THE   OROSIUS  COMPARED  WITH 
THAT  OF   WIDSITH. 

1.  The  statement  of  Widsith  that  the  realm  which  Offa  won  was  the 
greatest  of  kingdoms  is  confirmed  by  the  addition  to  the  Orosius  (ed. 
Sweet,  p.  19).  However  we  read  this  passage,  it  can  hardly  be  interpreted 
otherwise  than  that  the  old  Anglian  home  extended  two  days'  sail  (i.e. 
between  one  and  two  hundred  miles)  from  its  centre  in  Schleswig,  and 


Appendix  255 

embraced  "many  islands1."  Apparently  SUlende  and  Gotland  are  also 
included  in  the  old  home  of  the  Engle.  SUlende  may  be  Silund2  (Zealand), 
but  it  is  possibly  Sinlendi,  a  district  in  the  south  of  Jutland3.  Gotland  is 
almost  certainly  Jutland  (Reift-aotaland).  It  is  not  quite  the  case  (as 
Bjorkman  argues,  Engl.  Stud,  xxxix,  360)  that  there  is  no  philological 
difficulty  in  taking  Gotland  as  Jutland :  Ohthere  would  have  said  Jotland, 
and  this  should  have  been  written  Geotland,  not  Gotland:  but  seeing 
that  this  portion  of  the  Orosius  is  extant  only  in  one  late  MS.,  which  is 
full  of  misspellings,  this  error  presents  no  insuperable  difficulty.  It  looks 
then  as  if  the  cynerica  mcest  of  Offa  might  well  have  included  the  greater 
part  of  the  present  Denmark,  as  well  as  Schleswig. 

2.  Only  the  larger  tribes  are  mentioned  in  the  Alfredian  description 
of  Germany :  there  is  nothing  like  the  exclusive  interest  shown  in  Widsith 
in  the  tribes  dwelling  on  the  Baltic,  though  the  Baltic  islands  are  carefully 
enumerated.     The  difference  is  between  the  current  knowledge  of  a  well 
informed  man  in  the  ninth  century  and  a  geographical  knowledge,  more 
detailed  within  its  narrower  sphere,  going  back  to  earlier  times. 

3.  Brandl  has  suggested  that  the  "  Biblical  interpolation  "  is  derived 
from  the  Orosius.     But  the  coincidences  are  not  very  numerous,  and  the 
forms  used  differ.     Contrast  Moidum  with  MctfSum,  MeSum  ;  Istum  with 
Estum,  Osti. 


(M)    SCHtfTTE'S  LAW  OF  INITIAL  AND  TERMINAL  STRESS. 

Oldsagn  om  Godtjod,  by  Dr  Gudmund  Schutte,  has  been  frequently 
quoted  above  with  reference  to  details :  one  general  point  needs  a  fuller 
examination.  Schutte  formulates  the  law  that,  in  Germanic  name-lists, 
the  first  member  is  the  one  of  greatest  general  importance;  the  last  the 
one  in  which  the  framers  of  the  tradition  have  the  most  special  interest. 
Dr  Axel  Olrik  has  emphasized  the  value  of  this  law  as  "a  test  in  cases 
which  have  hitherto  perplexed  the  student"  (Folk-Lore^  xix,  353,  1908), 

1  See  above,  p.  72.    In  favour  of  the  interpretation  of  Denemearc  there 
given,  it  should  be  noted  that  Adam  of  Bremen  (in  describing  that  same  portion 
of  the  present  southern  Sweden,  which  Ohthere  is  coasting)  makes  the  Danish 
territory  stretch   up  to  Norway :  primi  occurrunt  Nortmanni,  deinde  Sconia 
prominet,  regio  Danorum  (Adam  of  Bremen  in  Pertz  (fol.)  vn,  373).     Adam 
regards  Sconia  as  an  integral  part  of  Denmark:    Sconia  est  pulcherrima  visu 
Danice  provintia.     To  Adam  the  boundary  between  Denmark  and  Sweden  is 
not,  as  at  present,  the  sea,  but  the  forests  and  uplands  of  what  is  now  the 
interior  of  Sweden :   Sconia  est  pars  ultima  Daniee  fere  insula,  undique  enim 
cinr.ta  est  mart  prater  unum  terra  brachium  quod  ab  oriente  continens  Sueoniam 
disterminat  a  Dania.    This  is  exactly  the  geography  of  Ohthere. 

2  For  the  form  and  interpretation  of  Silund,  cf.  Much  in  P.B.B.  xvn,  196; 
Kossinna  in  I.F .  vn,  281. 

3  Chadwick  (104,  note);  cf.  Schiick  (19)  " Sonderjylland."    It  can  hardly 
be,  as  Sweet  thinks,  Holstein. 


256  Widsith 

and  suggests  that  "Schiitte's  Law"  may  prove  as  efficient  in  folk-lore 
analysis  as  has  Verner's  Law  in  phonetic  analysis. 

That  the  law  represents  a  widely-spread  tendency  of  the  mind  seems 
clear :  it  will  be  found  to  apply  very  generally.  I  take  the  first  two 
lists  which  occur  to  me.  The  list  of  David's  mighty  men  of  valour 
(II  Samuel,  xxiii)  begins  with  Adino  the  Eznite,  chief  of  the  captains  and 
hero  of  the  greatest  achievement  ("he  lift  up  his  spear  against  eight 
hundred,  whom  he  slew  at  one  time  ") — clearly  the  one  of  greatest  general 
importance.  It  ends  with  Uriah  the  Hittite — certainly  the  one  of  greatest 
special  interest.  So  in  Mallory's  Morte  &  Arthur:  where  the  "hundred 
knights  and  ten  "  of  the  Round  Table  are  enumerated,  the  first  to  search 
Sir  Urre's  wound  is  King  Arthur,  the  last  Sir  Launcelot. 

But  I  doubt  whether  in  Widsith  any  such  law  is  consciously  operating. 
It  is  claimed  that  the  Catalogue  of  Kings  begins  with  Attila  and  ends 
with  Offa  (Olrik,  p.  353).  But  is  Attila,  rather  than  Ermanaric,  the  king 
of  greatest  general  importance  1  And  the  list  does  not  end  with  Offa. 
If  we  include  the  supplementary  lines  (35-49),  it  ends  with  Hrothwulf, 
Hrothgar  and  Ingeld :  if  we  omit  these  lines,  it  ends  with  Alewih.  The 
list  of  Gothic  champions  begins  with  Hethca,  otherwise  unknown.  It 
ends  with  Wudga  and  Hama,  who  certainly  seem  to  be  of  most  special 
interest  to  the  poet.  But  that  he  did  not  consciously  regard  the  last 
place  as  due  to  those  in  whom  he  had  a  special  interest  is  shown  by  his 
apology  for  so  placing  them  : 

ne  wseran  J>aet  gesij>a  >a  saemestan, 
)>eahj>e  ic  hy  anihst  nemnan  sceolde. 


(N)    ON  THE  BEAG  GIVEN  BY  EORMANRIC. 

The  beag  is  said  to  contain  refined  gold  to  the  value  of  siex  hund 
sceatta  scillingrime.  The  stilling  (not  an  actual  coin,  but  a  denomination 
of  money  value)  was  equal,  in  Mercia,  to  four  silver  sceattas.  The  sceatt 
was  a  current  coin,  but  the  term  is  also  used  generally  in  the  sense  of 
"  money,"  and  I  take  that  to  be  its  force  here,  "  money  to  the  quantity 
of  six  hundred  counted  in  shillings,"  i.e.  the  beag  is  worth  600  shillings 
(  =  2400  sceattas,  using  sceatt  in  its  narrower  sense). 

This  rendering  seems  preferable  to  the  alternative  one,  of  taking  sceatt 
strictly  and  stilling  vaguely,  "six  hundred  sceattas  reckoned  in  money," 
because : 

(1)  It  is  easy  to  parallel  the  use  of  sceatt  as  equivalent  to  "money" 
generally,  indeed  this  is  its  normal  force,  but  it  would  be  difficult  so  to 
explain  stilling. 

(2)  If  we  take  the  Anglian  reckoning  of  four  silver  sceattas  to  the 
shilling  (Seebohm,  363)  and  allow  twenty  sceattas  to  the  Roman  ounce 


Appendix  257 

(Seebohm,  443—455)  and  reckon  gold  to  silver  as  1  : 12  (Seebohm,  451)  we 
find  that  a  golden  beag  worth  600  sceattas  would  have  weighed  2£  ounces, 
one  worth  600  shillings  ten  ounces.  Since  the  gift  is  mentioned  as  note 
worthy,  the  latter  interpretation  is  distinctly  preferable,  in  view  of  the 
considerable  weight  of  existing  gold  necklets  and  armlets.  Cf.  e.g. 
Odobesco  (A.),  Le  Tremor  de  Petrossa,  Paris,  1900  ;  Rygh,  NorsJce  Oldsager, 
Christiania,  1885  (especially  Nos.  704,  705,  707,  708,  714 a);  Archaeologia, 
xxxm,  347 ;  xxxix,  505,  etc, 

On  the  other  hand,  to  take  the  beag  (with  Holthausen)  as  worth 
600  gold  pieces  would  be  to  make  it  altogether  too  massive,  and  seerns 
hardly  possible  linguistically,  for  though  the  sceatt  is,  exceptionally,  a  gold 
coin,  the  stilling  is,  as  stated  above,  a  denomination  for  the  value  of  so 
many  silver  sceattas. 


c.  17 


10 


The  dotted  lines  are  drawn 

to  connect  different  localities 

inhabited  at  different  times 

by  one  tribe.     No  attempt 

is  made  to  indicate  the  exact 

route  taken  by  that  tribe 

la   fts  migrations. 


Long.  10  E.  of  Green w.    15 


8  SciringesheaL 


12 


The  dotted  line  represents 
the  course  apparently 
followed  by  Obthere. 


54 


INDEX 


^gelmund,  121,  220 

JElfwine,  see  Alboin 

JSnenas,  209 

2Estii,  248  etc. 

Mtla,  191,  222.     See  also  Attila 

Agathias,  his  account  of  the  death  of 

Phulcaris,  60 

Alboin  (O.E.  jElfwine),  123  etc.,  211 
Alewih,  203 

Alexander  the  Great,  legend  of,  190-1 
Alfred    the    Great,    his    interest    in 

"Saxon"  songs,  2;  on  the  original 

home  of  the  Angles,  71-2  note,  241 

etc. 
Ammianus  Marcellinus,  his  account  of 

Ermanaric,  16 
Ammius  (Hamido,  O.N.  Hamthir),  17, 

19,  29 

Amothingas,  215 
Angel,  71-5,  189,  241  etc. 
Angles,  Angli,  see  Engle 
"Anglo-Frisian,"  154 
Anglo-Saxon  Chronicle,  the  genealogies 

in,  119  etc. 

Angul,  brother  of  Dan,  76-7 
Athislus,  see  Eadgils 
Attila  (O.E.    Mil&;    M.H.G.   Etzel; 

O.N.  Atli),  44-6 
Audoin  (O.E.  Eadwine),  122  etc.,  212, 

220 
Authun    the    Icelander,   and    Harold 

Hardrada,  25-6 
Aviones,  see  Eowas 

Baningas,  191 

Bardengau,  116 

Beadeca,  218,  219 

Beanstan,  110  note 

Becca,  Bicca  (O.N.  Bikki),  19-20,  23, 

191   219 

Beowulf  the  Geat,  25,  83-4,  184 
Beowulf,  the  story  of  Sceaf  in,  118 
Bikki,  see  Becca 
Billing,  196 
Bojunga,  on  the  date  of  Widsith,  34 


Bragi  the  old,  his  Eagnars  drdpa,  19- 

20  note;  101 
Brandl,  Prof.  Alois,  on  Widsith,  140- 

1,212 

Breca,  110-11 
Brondingas,  111  note 
Burgundians,  58,  161-2  note,  192,  210 

Gaelic,  192 

Casere,  192,  212 

Cassiodorus,  his  Variae  referred  to,  13, 

14,  35,  37  note 
Chadwick,  Mr  H.  M.,  on  Widsith,  141 

etc. ;  on  Germanic  ethnography,  156 

note 
Charles  the  Great,  his  interest  in  the 

ancient  songs,  2 
Chauci,  67-9 
Creacas  (the  Greeks),  166,  192,  212 

Dan,  king  of  the  Danes,  76 
Danes,  75  etc. 
Daukiones,  75  note 
Deanas,  210 

Dear's  Song,  4,  40,  42,  105 
Dialect  of  Widsith,  166 
Dunheath,  battle  of,  46-8 

Eadgils  (Saxo,  Athislus;  O.N.  Athils), 

92-4,  217 

Eadwine,  see  Audoin 
Ealhhild,  21-8,  217 
Eastgota,  13-15,  219,  236-7 
East-Thyringas,  215,  216 
Eatul  (Italy),  211 
Ebreas,  215 
Egyptas,  215 
Elsa,  122,  220 
Emerca,  see  Harlungs 
Engle  (Angli),  69,  73,  209,  245  etc. 
Eolas,  8,  216 

Eonnanrie,  see  Ermanaric 
Eotas,  see  Yte 

Eowas  (Aviones),  69,  73,  197 
Ermanaric  (O.E.  Eormanric;  M.H.Q. 


Index 


261 


Ermenrich,  Ermrich;  Thid.saga,  Er- 
minrekr ;  O.N.  Jormunrekkr ;  Saxo, 
larmericus),  15-40,  48-55,  191,  216 
etc.,  253 

Erminrek,  see  Ermanaric 

Ethel werd,  on  the  Sceaf  story,  118 

Eudoses,  69,  73-4 

Exsyringas,  215 

Fifeldor,  204 

Finn  Folcwalding,  67 

Finnas,  192,  212 

Franks,  112  etc.    See  also  Froncan 

Freotheric,  222 

Fresna  cynn,  see  Frisians 

Fridla,  see  Harlungs 

Frisians,  67,  197,  211 

Froda,  79 

Froncan,  195,  211 

Frumtingas,  68 

Frysan,  see  Frisians 

Gado,  see  Wade 

Geatas,  207 

Gefflegas,  209 

Gefwulf,  197 

Gensimund,  183 

Gepidae,  15,  209 

Gifica  (M.H.G.  Gibeche ;  O.N.  Giuki), 
64,  191 

Gifthas,  see  Gepidae 

Gislhere  (Gislahari),  65,  222 

Gizur,  47 

Glommas,  108-9  note,  193,  211 

Gotland,  254-5 

Gregory  the  Great,  his  opinion  of  the 
Lombards,  116 

Gummere,  on  the  date  of  Widsith,  150 

Gundahari,  see  Guthhere 

Gunnar,  see  Guthhere 

Gunther,  see  Guthhere 

Guthhere  (Gundahari;  M.H.G.  Gun 
ther;  O.N.  Gunnarr),  58-63,  211 

eelsingas,  108,  194 
Hserethas,  214 
Huethnas,  214 
Hastwere,  201-2 
Hagena^.-ff.G.  Hagen;  O.N.  Hogni; 

Saxo,  Htfginus),  100  etc. 
Halga  (Saxo,  Helgo;  O.N.  Helgi),  82 
Hama  (O.H.G.  Heimo;  M.H.G. Heime; 

O.N.  Heimir),  52-7,  222-3,  254,  256 
Harlungs,  story  of  the,  28-36,  218-19 
Heatho-Beardan,  79-81,  82,  205 
Heatho-Eeamas,  210 
Heathoric,  219 
Hebrews,  see  Ebreas 
Heimo,  Heime,  Heimir,  see  Hama 
Heinzel,"  Richard,   on    Ealhhild,   22, 

132 ;  on  the  Hervarar  saga,  47-8 


Heligoland,  71 

Helm,  198 

Hengest,  254 

Heoden  (M.H.G.  Hetel;  O.N.  Hethinn; 

Saxo,  Hithinus),  100  etc.,  193 
Heorot,  78  etc.,  205 
Heoroweard  (Saxo,  Hiarwarus),  84 
Herefaran,  202 
Herelingas,  see  Harlungs 
Herminones,  155  etc. 
Heruli,  216,  245 
Hervarar  saga,  46-8 
Hethca,  218 
Hild,  101  etc. 

Hildebrand,  master,  40,  52 
Hlithe  (O.N.  Hlothr),  46-8,  219 
Hnarf,  197 

Hocingas,  68  note,  197 
Hodbroddus,  81 
Holen,  202 

Holmryge,  see  Rugians 
Horsa,  254 

Hreedas,  163,  221,  252 
Hrethcyning,  189,  252  etc. 
Hrethric  (Saxo,  Rtfricus),  83,  84  note 
Hringweald,  202 
Hronas,  210 
Hrothgar  (Saxo,  Roe;   O.N.  Hroarr), 

81-3 
Hrothwulf  (Saxo,  Roluo;  O.N.  Hrolfr), 

81-4,  254 
Hugas,  68  note 

Hug-Dietrich,  see  Theodoric  the  Frank 
Humli,  46-8 
Hun,  201 

Hundingas,  195,  214 
Hungar  (perhaps  Hunigaisus,  Onege- 

sius),  220-1 
Hunlaf(ing),  254 
Hunuil,  see  Unwen 
Hwala,  190 
Hydatius,  62 

Idumingas,  8,  216,  250  etc. 

Incgentheow(O..N.  Angantyr),  46-8, 219 

Indeas,  215 

Ing,  77  note 

Ingaevones,  155  etc. 

Ingeld  (Ingellus,  Hinieldus),  78  note, 

79-81 

Ingwine,  77  note 
Iring,  114,  115 
Irminfrid,  114,  185 
Island-Rugians,  see  Rugians 
Israhelas,  215 
Istaevones,  155  etc. 
Iste,  8,  216,  248  etc. 

Jordanes,  his  account  of  Germanic 
songs,  13-14 ;  of  Ostrogotha,  14-15 ; 
of  Ermanaric,  16-19,  53 


262 


Index 


Jormunrekk,  see  Ermanaric 

Julian    the    Apostate,    on    Germanic 

song,  2 
Jutae,  see  Yte 

Ket  (Saxo,  Keto),  85,  93-4 

Kudrun,  102 

Kynaston,  Sir  Francis,  on  Wade,  97 

Langobardi,  see  Lombards 

Lawrence,  Dr  W.  W.,  on  the  structure 
of  Widsith,  136  etc. 

leben  in  place  names,  245 

Leonas,  213,  214 

Leth(uc),  a  Lombard  king,  122 

Lex  Angliorum  et  Werinorum  hoc  est 
Thuringorum,  245 

Lichtenheld's  tests,  167  etc. 

Lidwicingas,  213 

Lombards,  115  etc.,  201,  205-6,  213 

Lombard  and  Gothic  story  perhaps 
connected,  23,  122 

Longbeardan,  see  Lombards 

"Low  German,"  ambiguity  of  the 
term,  154 

Loyalty  as  a  motive  in  Germanic  lite 
rature,  59-60;  in  Germanic  life,  183 
etc. 

Malmesbury,  William  of,  on  the 
"Sceaf"  story,  118 

Map,  Walter,  his  tale  of  Gado,  99 

Maurer,  K.,  his  views  on  the  date  of 
Widsith,  7,  147 

Mauringa,  161 

Maurungani,  159-61,  235-6 

Meaca,  195 

Mearchealf,  195 

Merseburg  Glosses,  242 

Moller,  on  the  structure  and  date  of 
Widsith,  130  etc.,  150 

Mofdingas,  215 

Moidas,  215 

Morris,  William,  on  the  Sigfrid  story, 
61,63 

Morsbach's  tests,  171 

Mullenhoff,  Carl,  on  the  story  of  the 
Harlungs,  30-3 ;  on  Gundahari,  62 ; 
on  the  Offa-story,  90 ;  on  the  struc 
ture  and  date  of  Widsith,  128  etc., 
150 

Myrgingas,  159  etc.,  195,  204,  215,  217 

Nerthus,  69-71 

Nibelungen  Lied,  3,  61 

Njorth,  70-1 

Nuithones,  69,  74 

Nuodunc  (Thid.  saga,  Nauthung),  51 

Odoacer,  29,  30  note,  39-40,  59 


Offa,  king  of  Angel  (Saxo,  Uffo),  84-92, 

202 

Olrik,  Dr  Axel,  on  Widsith,  147,  150 
Onegesius,  see  Hungar 
Ongel,  see  Angel 
Ongentheow,  200 
Orosius,  71 

Ostrogotha,  see  Eastgota 
Oswine,  197 

Panzer,  on  the  story  of  Hagena  and 
Heoden,  105-8 

Paul  the  Deacon,  on  the  death  of  Gun 
dahari,  62-3;  on  Agelmund,  121, 
123;  on  Alboin  and  Thurisind,  123 
etc. ;  on  Mauringa,  161 

Peohtas,  213 

Persas,  215 

Phulcaris,  death  of,  60 

Priscus,  his  account  of  minstrelsy  at 
Attila's  court,  175 

Prosper  Aquitanus,  62 

Ptolemy's  Geography,  243  etc. 

Baedhere,  222 

Eavenna,  Geographer  of,  159-61 

Keudigni,  69,  73 

Eichter,  Carl,  171  etc. 

Eondingas,  196,  222 

Eugas,  see  Rugians 

Eugians,  192-3,  211 

Eurasian,  222 

Eumwalas,  211 

Sffiferth,  199 

Sarus  (Sarilo,  O.N.  Sorli),  17,  19,  29 

Saxo  Grammaticus,  on  the  Swanhild 

story,  19-20;  on  Dan  and  Angul,  76 

-7 ;  on  Ingellus,  80 ;  on  Offa,  85-8 ; 

on  Hithinus  and  Eteginus,  103 
Saxons,  68-9,  73, 210 
Sceafa,  117,  201 
Sceafthere,  200 
sceatt,  217,  256 
Scilling,  218 
settling,  256 
Scottas,  213 
Scride-Finnas,  213 
Seafola  (M.H.G.  Sabene),  41,  219 
Seaxe,  see  Saxons 
Secca,  219 
Sercingas,  212 
Seringas,  212 
Sibich,  see  Sifeca 
Sidonius    Apollinaris,    on    Germanic 

song,  2;  on  the  defeat  of  Gundahari, 

62 
Siebs,  Prof.  Theodor,  on  Widsith,  143 

etc. 
Sifeca  (M.H.G.  Sibich;    Thid.  saga, 

Sifka),  32-3,  51,  219 


Index 


263 


Sigehere,  197 

Sillende,  254-5 

Snorri,  his  story  of  Hogni  and  Hethin, 

101 

Sorli,  see  Sarus 
Speght,  on  Wade,  96 
Starkath,  81 
Suardones,  69,  74 
Sueboi  Aggeiloi  of  Ptolemy,  243 
Sunilda,  see  Swanhild 
Swaefe,  194,  204-5,  209 
Swanhild  (Sunilda),  17-19 
Swedes,  199 
Sweordweras,  210 
Sweyn  Aageson,  on  Offa,  85-8 
Sycgan,  199,  210 
Symons,  on  the  date  of  Widsith,  150 

Tacitus,  on  Germanic  song,  12;  on 
Germanic  loyalty,  59;  on  the  Ger 
manic  coast  tribes,  66-7;  on  the 
Nerthus-worshippers,  69-75;  on  the 
ethnographical  divisions  of  Ger 
many,  155 

Ten  Brink,  on  the  structure  and  date 
of  Widsith,  IBletc.,  150 

Theodoric  of  Verona  (M.H.G.  Dietrich 
von  Bern;  Thid.  saga,  Thithrekr), 
13,  36-44,  51,  54,  219 

Theodoric  the  Frank,  112  etc.,  185, 
195 

Thiadric,  see  Theodoric  the  Frank 

Thidreks  saga,  quoted  passim,  but  see 
especially  61,  69 

Throwendas,  210 

Thuringia,  245  etc.  See  also  Thyrin- 
gas 

Thuringian  war,  113  etc. 

Thurisind  and  Thurismod,  124 

Thyringas,  198,  210.  See  also  Thurin 
gian  war 

Unwen  (Hunuil),  219,  254 
Vandili,  156 


Varini,  see  Wernas 
Vidigoia,  see  Wudga 
Vistula-wood,  see  Wistla  wudu 
Vitae  Duorum  Off  arum,  88-90 
Vithga,  see  Wudga 
Vylsunga  saga,  61 

Wade  (O.E.  Wada;  M.H.G.  Wate; 
Thid.  saga,  Vathe),  95  etc.,  102-3 

Wsernas  (Varini),  69,  73,  196,  245  etc. 

Wala  rice,  212 

Wald,  198 

Waldere  fragment,  42 

Warni,  see  Varini 

Wends,  209 

Wenlas,  208 

Wermund,  85-8 

Wernas,  see  Warnas 

Wicinga  cynn,  Wicingas,  205,  208 

Widia,  see  Wudga 

Widsith,  188 

Widukind,  113  etc. 

Wig  (Saxo,  Wigo),  85,  93-4 

Winedas,  see  Wends 

Wistla  wudu,  142,  163,  221-2 

Witege,  see  Wudga 

Withergield,  222 

With-Myrgingas,  221 

Witta,  194 

Wod,  198 

Woingas,  198 

Wolf -Dietrich,  112  etc. 

Worms,  Burgundians  at,  58 

Wrosnas,  202 

Wudga,  Widia  (Jordanes,  Vidigoia; 
M.H.G.  Witege;  Thid.  saga,  Vithga), 
42-3,  48-53,  55,  222-3,  254,  256 

Wulfhere,  221 

Wulfingas,  198 

Wynnhere  (O.N.  Ormarr),  47,  221 

Ydumaei,  250  etc. 

Ymbre,  200 

Yte  (Jutae),  73-4,  237-41 


CAMBRIDGE  I    HUNTED    BY   JOHN    CLAY,    M.A.    AT    THE    DNIVEB8ITY    PRESS. 


WING  SZrr.  NOV    6*72 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


PR 
1788 
05 
1912 


Chambers,  Raymond  Wilson 
Widsith 


